Are you free? Free to choose what you do  and make decisions? Or are you an NPC,  
unable to decide anything for yourself? You  feel that you have control over your life,  
or at least what you’ll have for breakfast.  But this may be an illusion. Physics actually  
may force you to go through life as  if on rails, with no free will at all.
You experience free will all the time. Like when  
you decided to watch this video  instead of doing something useful.  
Free will is your ability to decide by yourself  what you do. It means that the future is an open  
arena that you can shape with your actions. It’s  at the core of human relationships – it means  
you are responsible for your actions, which  is the basis of our moral and legal systems.
There are too many dimensions for one short  video – moral, psychological, biological,  
so we’ll focus on the most essential  part: Is free will even possible?
Two main philosophical camps are fighting  about this. No matter how we represent them,  
they'll be upset about it – so we’ll use  our own words. The first camp claims that  
the very idea of free will is fundamentally  incompatible with the laws of the universe:
You Are an NPC
Whatever “you” exactly are, it's  somehow made up of your physical  
brain and body. And these are made of cells,  
which are made of proteins, which are made of  atoms and particles like protons or electrons.
So fundamentally, you are a specific, quite  lovely, dynamic pattern of particles. Particles  
have no will, no motivation, no freedom,  they blindly follow the laws of physics.  
And we don’t know why, but most laws  of physics are deterministic – which  
means that things happen the way they do  because of the things that came before.
If you play pool and hit a ball at a specific  speed and angle, the laws of physics tell you  
exactly how all the balls on the table will  behave – their speeds, recoil directions,  
everything. These laws completely decide the  behavior of all balls on the table. At the  
microscopic level things work very much  like that, only without players. Actions  
and reactions affect all the particles in the  universe, creating a chain of causal effects  
that extends throughout time, from the past to the  future. Things happen, making other things happen.
Now imagine that if, right after the  Big Bang, a supersmart supercomputer  
looked at every single particle in the  universe and noted all their properties.  
Just by applying the deterministic laws  of physics, it should be able to predict  
what all the particles in existence  would be doing until the end of time.
But if you are made of particles and  it’s technically possible to calculate  
what particles will do forever, then  you never decided anything. Your past,  
present and future were already  predetermined and decided at the  
Big Bang. That would mean there is a kind of  fate and you are not free to decide anything.
You may feel like you make decisions,  but you're actually on autopilot. The  
motions of the particles that make  up your brain cells that made you  
watch this video were decided 14 billion  years ago. You are just in the room when  
it happens. You're only witnessing how the  universe inside you unfolds in real time.
But this can’t be true because of quantum  mechanics, right? Quantum processes are  
intrinsically random, not deterministic, and  can’t be predicted with total certainty. On  
the quantum pool table, balls can go  randomly left or up or banana. Their  
behavior isn’t set by what came before  but randomly decided in real time.
But for the no-free-will camp, this doesn’t  affect their argument . They think that since  
quantum processes are random, they don’t allow  you to make any decisions. Because if there is  
randomness for the things that fundamentally  make up your brain and body, these random  
processes make the decisions for you. How?
Say an electron can randomly go right or  left. If it goes left, it triggers electric  
currents between your neurons that create a  neuronal process, which triggers a long chain  
of actions that make you watch a youtube video.  Or it goes right and makes you clean your room.  
Just because the chain is extremely complex  doesn’t mean you have any control over it.
So maybe your fate was not decided at the Big  Bang but it is decided at this very moment. The  
important part is that it's not decided by you.  You get no say in this, you have no free will.
Wow. This is kind of a bummer because the  argument fundamentally seems to make sense.  
Except nooooooo, screams the free will side, this  is a really bad way to think about the universe.
You Are The Main Character
We know that we can reduce everything that  exists to its basic particles and the laws that  
guide them. While this makes physics feel like the  only scientific discipline that actually matters,  
there is a problem: You can’t explain everything  in our universe only in terms of particles.
One key fact about reality that we can’t  explain by looking just at electrons and  
quantum stuff is emergence. Emergence is  when many small things together create  
new fundamental traits that didn’t exist before.
A drop of water is just a  sextillion H2O molecules.  
If you get water on your pants, they get  wet. But what is… wetness? H2O molecules  
are not wet. But your pants are definitely  wet now. Many small things together just  
created something new that doesn't exist  at the level of the individual molecules.
Emergence occurs at all levels of reality,  and reality seems to be organized in layers:  
atoms, molecules, cells, tissues, organs, you,  society. Put many things in one layer together  
and they’ll create the next layer up. Every  time they do, entirely new properties emerge.
One Atom can’t handle information, but many  of them together can form a DNA molecule.  
Molecules are not alive, but many of them can form  a cell, and cells are alive. With each jump up the  
complexity ladder the rules of what's possible  change. Completely new things emerge that are much  
more than the sum of their parts. And here the  reductionist view of the universe breaks down.
The layers of reality need each other to make  sense. You can explain living things with cells,  
cells with molecules and molecules  with atoms. But because of emergence,  
you can’t start with quantum particles and  reconstruct the universe. You can’t explain  
galaxies with quantum mechanics,  or human psychology with quarks.
This is not the whole story. Reality is not  just structured in layers but for some reason  
the layers are also largely independent of  each other. Things existing within the same  
layer can influence each other and maybe  a layer up or down. But often they don’t  
seem to influence things much higher up or  down. To figure out how your organs work,  
you don’t need quarks. To understand politics,  you don’t need to know about cells! If you want  
to explain things happening on one layer, you  can only do that by staying close to that layer.
“Noooooooo” screams the no-free-will camp  
in frustration. “You can’t just  use magic to explain free will!”
But the emergence argument doesn’t invoke  magic. It just says that thinking about free  
will in terms of determinism and fundamental  laws is a dead end. A kind of category error,  
like trying to explain galaxies by  looking at your digestive tract.  
It is part of a reductionist school  of thinking about the universe that  
very successfully shaped science for a long  time – but that's challenged by emergence.
So maybe, trying to understand free will  by looking at fundamental particles,  
deterministic laws and quantum  mechanics misses the point. The  
question we should be asking is – which  layer of reality is relevant to free will?
Well, just like no individual molecule creates  wetness, not a single cell in your brain wants  
to watch Youtube. But one layer up, your  brain made of 80 billion interconnected  
neurons does. On this layer all the things  relevant to you emerge: your consciousness,  
character, feelings, your fears and dreams. This  is where you emerge. We don’t know why and how,  
but we know that you're here, right now.  How all the things going on in your brain  
play off each other to make you who you are  is a whole different can of worms – but on  
this layer of reality, you are part of the  decision process. Because, at this level,  
“you” are just one more physical cause of  whatever happens in your brain. You are shaped  
by your decisions and your decisions are shaped by  you. You have a say about this layer of reality.
You are not just witnessing how the  universe inside you unfolds – you’re  
actually taking part in it! And  you are free to do so however  
you see fit. At least this is how  some on the free will side see it.
Conclusion and Opinion
So who is right? Is there free will? We  don’t know. If you ask us personally,  
we think the argument for free will  is more appealing because it brings  
the complexity of the universe to the table.  Maybe existence is just the sum of its parts,  
but at least for now it seems  the universe is not that simple.
But even if we don’t have free will, it’s  not clear what that changes for practical  
purposes. You and us, we humans, on a purely  subjective basis, feel like we have free will  
and that your decisions are yours to make. As  long as we are not sure either way, and if it  
feels like you are making decisions, what does  it matter if a non-existent supercomputer could  
have calculated the future at the big bang?  Or if quantum stuff all the way down randomly  
nudges your cells one way or the other. Free  will that feels free is good enough for us.
In any case, now you can decide what to do  next. Maybe get some stuff done? Or watch  
more of our videos? It’s your decision! Probably.
At least you can pick which video to watch next -  in theory.
What you have really almost no control  over is how the state of the world is presented to  
you in the news. Algorithms are constantly working  behind the scenes to decide which information to  
show you, and alarmist headlines get amplified  over straightforward reporting. But Ground News,  
the sponsor of this video, can give you  back a feeling of independence.
They gather related news articles from around the  world in one place so you can compare coverage.  
For example, last month the UK government  passed a bill to deport asylum seekers to  
Rwanda. This bill was widely covered by more  than 150 news sources around the world. And  
using the Ground News Blindspot feed you can see  how this event is being framed by both sides of  
the political spectrum - instead of one side  that an algorithm has decided you align with. 
Right leaning sources focused on the idea  that migrants are continuing to cross the  
Channel despite the bill’s attempt to act as a  deterrent, while left-leaning sources focus on  
human rights groups' opposition to the bill. This way you can compare different viewpoints  
from all over the world, see how the story  and coverage change and be better equipped  
to engage in constructive dialogue  with those who hold different views.
Go to ground dot news slash nutshell to give it a  try. If you sign up through this link you’ll get  
40% off the unlimited access plan. We think they  do an important job – If you’re not completely  
free in your decision to stop scrolling, at  least take control over what occupies your mind. 
To help you make the most of your  life we've created a Curiosity Guide 
that will take you on epic adventures  to change your perspective on the world.


Crash Course Philosophy is brought to you by Squarespace.
Squarespace: share your passion with the world.
Let’s say, for the sake of argument, that you love your father.
By which I mean, you want him to be alive.
And let’s also assume that you don’t have any attachments to your mother that you might describe as... romantic.
Well, guess who thought felt the same way about his parents? Oedipus.
According to ancient Greek legend, when Oedipus was born,
a prophecy foretold that he would kill his father and marry his mother.
So his father left baby Oedipus in the wilderness, assuming he would die,
and the prophecy would then not come true.
But instead, the abandoned baby was discovered and raised by another family.
As an adult, Oedipus learned of the prophecy that he would kill his father and marry his mother.
So, not knowing he was adopted, he left his adoptive parents in order to avoid fulfilling that prophecy,
figuring that if he wasn’t near them, it couldn’t come true.
Lo and behold, as he was trying to flee his fate, Oedipus killed a stranger in a fit of rage,
who turned out to be the father he had never met.
He then proceeded to marry the dead man’s widow,
who was actually his mother, though he didn’t know it.
Needless to say, this is a fate that, needless to say, any of us would like to avoid.
But for philosophers, the whole point of the story of Oedipus is: there is no escaping fate.
[Theme Music]
Are we free
Are we free?
I mean, on the one hand, most of us have the clear sense that we are.
We feel free.
We feel like we make all sorts of decisions that lead to both beliefs and actions that are wholly of our own choosing.
Like, I could do that.
I had oatmeal this morning because I felt like it.
This view – that humans are capable of entirely free actions – is known as libertarian free will.
And to be clear, libertarian free will is nothing like political libertarianism.
Both views get their name from the word liberty,
but political libertarians are all about freedom from government intervention,
while people who accept libertarian free will could be anything from political libertarians to socialists.
They just think that, metaphysically, we can act freely.
So a lot of us figure that our thoughts and actions are free.
But, most of us also believe that every effect has a cause,
And that everything that happens now, in the present,
is the necessary result of events that occurred in the past.
This view is known as hard determinism.
And many of the people watching this probably think that they believe in both things;
that many of your actions are free, and that the world is governed by cause and effect.
But, it turns out, you can’t rationally hold both views.
Because, traditionally, libertarians have defined free actions according to what’s known as the Principle of Alternate Possibilities.
That might sound like the plot device for a sci-fi show,
but this principle says that an action is free only if the agent
– that is, the person doing the thing – could have done otherwise.
So, truly free actions require options.
Hard Determinism
Determinism, by contrast, doesn’t allow options.
It holds that every event is caused by a previous event.
Which means that an agent can never have done anything other than what they did,
and therefore, they are never free.
But let’s look at these two options more closely.
And also, let’s look at my breakfast.
Libertarianism says that my decision to eat oatmeal this morning
wasn’t necessarily caused by anything that happened before it.
Instead, it could have been the result of non-physical events
– specifically, my own thoughts – that originated right at that point.
I ate oatmeal because I decided to eat oatmeal!
End of story.
But libertarianism runs counter to what we know about the workings of the physical world,
with one thing causing another.
So libertarians need a way to account for their view.
One way they do that is by making a distinction between what’s known as event causation, and agent causation.
Event causation means that no physical event can occur without having been caused by a previous physical event.
So, many libertarians concede that the physical world itself is deterministic.
Like, a baseball is flying through the air because someone hit that ball with a bat.
But many libertarians also argue that there’s such a thing as agent causation,
which says that an agent – a being propelled by a mind –
can start a whole chain of causality that wasn’t caused by anything else.
So, the person who hit the ball most likely did so because they just decided to do it.
By this logic, agents have the ability to affect the causal chain of the universe.
They can make stuff happen on their own.
But, many philosophers find this idea untenable.
Where would these free decisions, the ones that launch entirely new causal chains, come from, they ask?
Are they simply random?
What would compel an agent to make one decision, and not another?
And if you can answer those questions – if you can explain what would cause an agent to act –
Then well, you’ve just reinforced the position that actions are caused, rather than free.
The fact is, it’s pretty difficult to find arguments that support libertarian free will.
The best argument in favor of it seems to be that it just feels an awful lot like we’re free.
And libertarians argue that we shouldn’t discount the legitimacy of our own personal, subjective experiences –
so if we feel so free, we should seriously consider the possibility that we are.
That point has a certain intuitive appeal.
But if you can’t come up with an argument to defend your feeling,
then good philosophical reasoning recommends that you reject it,
or at least withhold judgment until you can get some evidence together.
Reductionism
So now let’s see if the hard determinists can do any better.
18th century French philosopher Baron D’Holbach said that none of our actions are actually free.
D’Holbach believed that everything that’s happening right now is the result of an unbroken chain of events.
Everything, he said, is the inevitable result of what came before.
Including everything that we do!
Our actions are caused in the same way that, say, home runs are caused by bats hitting balls,
or tornadoes are caused by warm air systems hitting cool air systems in the right conditions.
This means that humans and our actions are just part of the physical world, bound by its physical laws.
This belief is often explained through a view known as reductionism.
Reductionism is the view that all parts of the world, and of our own experience,
can be traced back – or reduced down – to one singular thing.
So, for example, you see your mind as being capable of making free decisions.
You think that what goes on in your head when you make a choice is not at all like bats and balls.
Free Will
But, well, mental states are brain states, or at least they’re tied directly to your brain.
And brain states are biological.
And biological states are physical states.
And the physical world – as we already said – is deterministic.
There’s just no room for free will in this picture.
We think we’re free - but we’re not.
And really, as scientific thinkers, why would we assume that we are?
Why would we think that we’re any different than everything else in the universe?
What would make us so special?
Libertarians are right that it’s really hard to disregard the feeling of freedom.
If I didn’t choose to eat oatmeal this morning, why do I feel like I did?
And what made me do it?
But hard determinists say that the difference between the causes of human actions
and the causes of physical events – like a bat hitting a ball –
is that our actions have all sorts of invisible causes that happen in our brains.
Specifically, when beliefs team up with our desires and our temperament, they say, you get a deliberate human action.
Combine my belief that oatmeal is nutritious, with my desire for healthy nourishment,
and the temperament that predisposes me to enjoy warm, carby comfort foods,
and ta-da! – you get oatmealy breakfast!
Now, you might argue that those particular beliefs, desires, and temperaments
might lead to any number of breakfast choices – cream of wheat, maybe, or some granola.
But, if you dig deep enough, you’d see that there are factors that rule out those options
– as well as every other option.
Maybe I’m a little worried about one of my fillings coming loose,
so I’m shying away from the granola because it’s too crunchy.
Or I just don’t think about cream of wheat very often.
I mean, they don’t have very good brand awareness anymore.
What even is cream of wheat exactly?
And the oatmeal is sitting right there in front of me.
Or maybe I think briefly of making one of those quinoa breakfast bowls that are so hip right now.
But my lazy temperament, or my belief that I’m running late,
pushes me to choose the 90-seconds-in-the-microwave option.
See how it works?
All you have to do is change one factor
– a belief, desire, or temperament – and you’ll get a different outcome.
Hard determinists argue that, just because we can’t pinpoint the exact factors that
led us to an action, we could, in theory isolate them –
if we knew enough about all the beliefs, desires, and temperaments swirling around in our brains.
Conclusion
So, in this view, what we call “decisions” are really just the inevitable results of a bunch of mental stuff combining in just the right way.
And maybe it feels free. But it’s not.
But hold up! Isn’t there some way out of this?
Like, what if I have someone choose my breakfast for me?
Or what if I fall back on randomness, by, like, flipping a coin?
After all, if I just flipped a coin, then it wouldn’t look like that decision was made by beliefs, desires, and temperaments.
But, well, no such luck.
Because even if I thought I chose randomly, my decision to flip the coin,
or who I asked to pick for me, was just as determined as everything else.
And guess what!
If you’re getting angry right now about me telling you none of your choices are free,
well, that anger was determined!
If you’re finding this whole topic confusing, or boring yep – still determined.
You think you can just freely choose to stop playing this video, but if you’re still
watching me, good news: that’s determined too!
Determinists believe that you can’t help but feel and react the way you’re reacting right now.
You can think you’re choosing to act in ways that conform to the character that you’ve
selected and shaped for yourself, but even that “choice” is the result of all sorts
of already-determined factors about you and your place in the world.
Hard determinism is tough to refute.
And it has some really uncomfortable implications.
It means the deeply held feeling most of us have that we actually make free decisions?
Is just wrong.
And the whole concept of personal responsibility is thrown out the window, too.
As D’Holbach put it, we’re all just “cogs in a machine,”
doing what we were always meant to do, with no actual volition.
Oedipus had to kill his dad and marry his mom.
I had to eat the oatmeal.
And you? You just had to keep watching! You couldn’t turn away!
Today we learned about libertarian free will and it’s counterpoint, hard determinism.
Next time, we’ll see if some middle ground can be found between determinism and libertarianism.
And I sure hope there can be.
Today's episode of Crash Course Philosophy was inevitably made possible by Squarespace.
Squarespace is a way to create a website, blog or online store for you and your ideas.
Squarespace features a user-friendly interface, custom templates and 24/7 customer support.
Try Squarespace at squarespace.com/crashcourse for a special offer.
Squarespace: share your passion with the world.
Crash Course Philosophy is produced in association with PBS Digital Studios.
You can head over to their channel and check out a playlist of the latest episodes from shows like
Coma Niddy, Deep Look, and First Person.
This episode of Crash Course was filmed in the Doctor Cheryl C. Kinney Crash Course Studio
with the help of these awesome people and our equally fantastic graphics team is Thought Cafe.


Introduction: Free Will
Charles I want to compare notes okay on
free will oh one of my favorite
[Music]
things here's my take it is true that at
Cause, Effect, & Chaos
some level of resolution that we can
observe causality is absolutely true
given these initial conditions this is
what will happen afterwards that's the
physicist phys speaking so if you take
it to its logical conclusion then there
is no free will because everything is
predetermined by things that everything
has an antecedent whether you know it or
not something is causing it to happen
something precipitated the thing that
caused the thing that made it's always
going to happen but there is also
stochastic uncertainty in the universe
it's built in there's randomness there's
unpredictability yeah and so you have to
ask I think if you're a physicist what
level of chaos actually affects you to
the extent that you could actually make
an instantaneous decision based on other
stuff let's not necessarily in your past
experiences or what you have just seen
in your current environment but wouldn't
all those past experiences and your
current environment despite the fact
that if you're introducing an element of
chaos so that you've never experienced
this ever before your experiences that
you have had would then inform your
decision about the thing that you've
never experienced your inform is the
word oh is it in orate right or require
right that's the thing there yeah let's
say you're in a a room with a whole
bunch of audience members you tell a
joke right it falls flat in that moment
you have many things you could do to
turn it into a laugh Point true right
you hear silence and you be like oh that
was good and everyone laughs or you know
you make is this m on Old you know what
do you do do you have the freedom to
choose one of several choices that you
had designed from your past that you
prepared to deal with that eventuality
or is the choice made for you already
but if he was less experienced he might
not dig out of that hole as effectively
or efficiently exactly but you've been
in a 100 cases where you had a joke bomb
you have data on how to pull out of it
so statistically you have a chance of
getting people smile instantaneously you
don't even realize that it's happening
it's in the moment the moment right did
you have free will to not see that's
right so now that would be interesting
because here you are in a place where
your instinct your training and 10,000
10,000 hours whatever it is Will as a
reflex cause you to say this this and
this and then people go wow that was
great look how he turned it around so
Charles can I say in that comment yeah
that he preloaded his neuros
synapses so that in that moment they all
tripped right they tripped meaning
triggered to go to the solution to that
problem right same is true but then I
wouldn't have free will at that point it
would just be a response what I would
have is a response to a situ
not necessarily I wasn't really choosing
that it chose it for you it chose it for
me you have five choices and then your
system choose chooses one of the five or
in that moment in that moment right and
so in that moment you are not exercising
Free Will did you set it up though with
free will in the past so that you could
react this way
deterministically but you actually were
in control of the circumstance right
here's another physical example of that
a football player is trying to sack a
quarterback the quarterback Jukes left
the person trying to sack the QB doesn't
have enough time to think about whether
to move left or right or up or down it
has to react based on years of training
and practice and experience so in that
moment that action is not free but in
the setting up of that moment if it was
free enough does that constitute Free
Will from a physics perspective it might
not then again again from a
psychological point of view or from a
biological point of view it might well
what good are you if you're not landing
on one side or the
other I don't need you to say it could
be this it could be that and I'm right
both ways whichever the the actual
answer is I was right yeah well he's
saying I don't really have the free will
to make that determination I'm going to
What Would You Do If Everything Was Predetermined?
be right or or wrong let's get let's
just ask an opinion in my opinion I
would like to have free will exist in
this universe even though
philosophically it can be argued that it
does not exist are you happy with a
world where you perceive free will even
if it
isn't maybe this has to do with the
movie arrival right starring Amy Adams
where if you know how your future is
going to turn out would you like to live
your life anyway right and the answer is
yes I would but I still would like to
think that the future is not yet
predetermined no no but I know what it's
different I'm not saying it's
predetermined and you know it M I'm
saying would you still be happy with
life if someone if some alien said look
dude you're your life is predetermined
there's nothing you can do about it Keep
On Believing you have free will and then
they go back to their Planet you're a
puppet on a string a puppet on a string
free free your free will puppet on the
string what I would say in that case is
that I would hope that the knowledge
that I have that uh puppet on the string
circumstance allows me to circumvent it
I can find a way if you know it's fate
right you've seen so many uh Greek
mythology stories where you try to avoid
the fate of uh whatever the gods have
act of
avoiding like edus for example would be
the most uh famious
example sorry so so the bottom line is
yes I would still be satisfied with
trying to do something different because
even the illusion of trying to do
something different is in itself a form
of Free Will physics wise though that's
the challenge right so so Neil if you
had to right now decide that Free Will
Free Win in Society
does exist or doesn't exist what would
you prefer I'm my thinking over the
recent years because I didn't used to
think about this at all my thinking of
recent years is leaning towards the
absence of Free Will for practically
everything we think and do in our lives
and I base that on the fact that over
time things that we have done as people
in our
species at one time was you are totally
to blame for that or something you did
or something you we've learned no this
person is more susceptible than you are
to addiction right there's a
biochemistry there this person cannot
just be made the life of the party
because they're on the autism spectrum
they don't control that in the way you
might think they should just because
you're the life of the party as you add
up all of these things let's go back to
epilepsy where before that was even a
word you were occupied by the devil did
you do something bad or well you knew it
was not everyone knew you were not in
control of it but today no one is saying
did you have the free will to not have
an epileptic seizure of course not do
you have the free will to not be
depressed the person who's ready to jump
off the bridge in that instant do they
have the free will to not jump off the
bridge I don't think so and the more I
add up and explore the Human Condition
I'm
forced to
conclude that the direction we are
headed is that we are all products of an
absence of Free Will and as a result
Society needs more compassion for people
who do not otherwise fit in mhm see I
have the exact opposite position in my
own mind I feel that it is because of
the absence of free will that you see in
most behavior that it is that 1% of Free
Will activity that moves Us in the right
direction bends us toward compassion
takes the Arc of History toward justice
but then but going back to what Neil
just said there are people who actually
suffer from personality disorders that
suffer from brain disorders where they
can't do what you just said they can't
express compassion they can't move a day
when no one even thought to analyze it
that way as a as a brain disorder just
aole yeah exactly that was it now if
they can't you can you can show that
person Compassion or understanding and
therefore Free Will as an entity exists
Char you're drawing a line that I have
seen be in constant motion over the
decades and over the centuries that line
that you're saying they don't have free
will but I do uhhuh uhuh I I don't know
that I can see I have free will over
some things and not over others someone
can see me and say ah that person needs
help in this way and has the free will
to help me I see somebody else who needs
this help and Free Will together it is a
network it's not that any individual you
have to draw the line for every
individual and even perhaps for society
does the
criminal who's born in poverty have free
will to not be a criminal if most of the
people in prison came in below the
poverty line so there's some
sociological Force operating there that
that where we are less susceptible to
that Force I think that's a great
question analogy let's say this say
those folks who have been branded
criminals by our society are
incarcerated yes we can then who were
fortunate enough not to face those same
circumstance ances who are not
incarcerated can look at these
incarcerated people and instead of
saying we must keep them away from
society welcome them back so that's
called restorative justice and that's a
free will example of the exercise of
Free Will of of society of society
toward individuals who may not have had
the options had the life experience to
you know recover from a a bombed joke I
saw an old movie where there's a guy
who's a junkie yeah right and he needed
help but said no the cops came and
arrested him because he was a junkie
today you wouldn't do that you would say
the person needs help they need right
right even if that person had robbed
somebody that person needs treatment and
the people who cannot shake whatever it
is that afflicts them tells me
that Free Will cannot be as free as we
think it is do you remember the the the
the shooter in the University of Texas
at Austin I remember that okay there's a
movie they man out called the tower yeah
where he left a note saying I just want
to kill people something must be wrong
with my brain please when I
die look into this they looked and there
was a tumor putting pressure on a part
of in fact that's how we learn anything
about how the brain works when you have
situations like this this person had the
free
will note he had the free will to write
the note so he did not have the will to
resist shooting but that's the the line
that you were talking about is a partial
one why isn't that line always in motion
Understanding the True Nature of Free Will
as we learn more and more about how the
mind works it is okay so then maybe it's
it's it's a con a line of convenience
today but tomorrow we're going to find
out oh my gosh that person has no real
free control over their behavior over
their personality over their Tendencies
over their treatment of others it's not
a line of convenience it is in your
words a perimeter of ignorance when
Newton said we couldn't explain certain
things God must have done it that's a
god of the gaps that delineates what we
don't know the line you describe I hope
is in fact that perimeter of ignorance
which we slowly are moving toward and
moving so that we do understand what the
true nature of Free Will is so this is
where people will push back most people
are concerned not about uh the actions
but the consequences so what they're
thinking about is the punitive response
to someone who does something wrong and
is a punitive response a deterrent for
somebody doing something wrong or or
doing something wrong in the future
especially if they don't have the free
will so so there's the other side of
this entire analysis is how does society
interact with people who are being
brought into the
circle day by day we're learning what we
have control over and what we don't biop
physiologically intellectually
emotionally yes why do people need
anxiety meds do they have the freedom to
not they have children that is why that
is why I I'm tell you I'm taking them
every day and and I got three reasons
that I take them every day some kids
need them because they have parents okay
I'm just saying nice very nice okay so
Charles if we're going to exit this
conversation if we find a point of
agreement it's that this perimeter of
ignorance we recognize inside the
perimeter there are forces operating
against Free Will yes our physiology our
neurochemistry yes and physics yes that
surely that perimeter May grow yes but
it's possible that there's a limit to
how far will grow yes Beyond which we
have to admit the existence of Free Will
yes okay I'll give you that very nice we
are a great job it doesn't have to be
absolute in One Direction or another
it's a bit more fluid okay and I'm okay
with that there is uncertainty in the
universe I embrace it I'll tell you this
much I've been married for 20 plus years
I do not have free
will on that
note Chuck and Charles thanks for help
helping us with this explainer awesome
the perspectives let's call it uh
emergent perspectives on Free Will Neil
degrass Tyson for Star talk yet another
explainer in the universe keep looking
up
[Music]


Introduction
Crash Course Philosophy is brought to you by Squarespace.
Squarespace: share your passion with the world.
Let me tell you a story that is disturbing, but true.
In the year 2000, a 40 year old man was arrested for possessing child pornography, and molesting his 8 year old stepdaughter.
The man had no previous history of pedophilia, and he said that he was baffled and dismayed by what appeared to be a sudden turn in his sexual behavior.
While he was awaiting his day in court, the man began to complain of terrible headaches.
A brain scan revealed a large tumor in his orbitofrontal cortex, the part of the brain known to control sexual impulse.
The tumor was removed, and, it turned out, so were his pedophilic impulses.
But about a year later, those impulses returned.
Another scan revealed that the tumor had returned as well.
So, a second surgery removed the tumor, and the pedophilic behavior diminished, this time for good.
Now, here’s a question: Was that man’s really horrible behavior a matter of free will?
Or was it determined – by what turned out to be a medical condition?
Or was it neither?
Could it even have been both?
[Theme Music]
Compatibilism
So far we’ve considered two metaphysical positions regarding the freeness – or not
– of our actions: hard determinism and libertarian free will.
If you’ve found both of them to be wanting, well, compatibilism might just be for you.
Compatibilists believe, somewhat like hard determinists, that the universe operates with
law-like order, and that the past determines the future.
But they also think there’s something different about some human actions;
that some of the actions we take really are free.
This view, known as soft determinism, says that everything is actually determined,
but we can still call an action free when the determination comes from within ourselves.
It’s like the difference between someone being pushed off a diving board, as opposed to jumping.
The result is the same – you end up in the water – but it does look like the cause is different.
In case 1, the cause is the pusher, while in case 2, the cause is the jumper.
Compatibilists say that in both cases, the action is determined – that is, it couldn’t not happen.
But when the action of an agent is self-determined – or determined by causes internal to herself – the action should be considered free.
This means that we might have moral responsibility for our actions,
since the determination for some of our acts can come from us alone.
Moral Responsibility
And this was something, you’ll recall, that hard determinists seemed to have to give up.
But, it’s unclear how meaningful moral responsibility really is, in this view.
After all, if we’re still determined, just by our own internal factors, then in what sense are we actually responsible?
Which brings us back to the man with the brain tumor.
If a growth in your brain, which you have no control over, causes you to have impulses
that you also have no control over – do you act freely if you act on those urges?
Pedophilia-inducing brain tumors are, luckily, rare, but there are much more common cases that are similar.
For example, should we hold people who suffer from severe mental illnesses responsible for their actions?
After all, the causes of their actions are internal to themselves.
So a compatibilist might be inclined to say that they’re free.
Yet it seems wrong to blame someone who’s in the grip of, say, hallucinations in the same way that we’d blame someone who’s not.
What about someone who becomes flirty after a few drinks?
Frankfurt Cases
Do we assign that behavior to the drinker, or on the drinks?
The drinker’s actions are caused by factors internal to themself – the alcohol, sure,
but also their body chemistry, how much they ate before drinking, and who knows how many other factors.
Last time, we learned about the Principle of Alternate Possibilities, and the long-standing
belief that, in order for an action to be free, an agent has to have been able to do something other than what they’ve done.
But contemporary American philosopher Harry Frankfurt challenges this idea, by arguing
that an agent could, in some cases, be morally responsible for things he does, even when he couldn’t have done otherwise.
We call these situations Frankfurt Cases,
which brings us to the Thought Bubble to explore one in this week’s Flash Philosophy.
Suppose there’s a fervent supporter of the Democratic party, and he comes up with a crazy
plan to make sure his party wins in the next election.
He decides to abduct voters and plant devices in their brains –
– something that, as far as I know, neither party has tried yet!
Now, these devices are designed to remain dormant unless a voter is going to vote Republican,
in which case it’ll activate, and compel them to vote Democratic.
Now, suppose that you were one of the unlucky abductees, and you head to the polls with a device in your brain.
But, you’ve always been a lifelong Democrat, and device or no device, you have every intention of voting Democratic this time.
You enter the polling booth, vote a straight Democratic ticket, and head home.
Since you never had any intention of doing anything other than voting Democratic, the device was never activated.
However, if you had decided to vote Republican, you would have been prevented from doing so.
The Principle of Alternate Possibilities says you were not free in this case, because you couldn’t have done otherwise.
Even if you’d tried to vote Republican you would still have voted for Democrats.
But, Frankfurt argues: You were still clearly responsible for your vote.
You were responsible, because you did what you wanted to do, even though you could not have done otherwise.
Thanks, Thought Bubble. So what do you think?
Not about the next election – I mean, can you be responsible without being able to do otherwise?
If you wanted to watch Crash Course, and would’ve watched it on your own,
but now it’s playing in class and you don’t actually have any choice, are you watching me freely?
Frankfurt Cases play on an intuition that many of us share – the idea that you’re responsible for actions you’ve chosen.
And your choice needs to come from within yourself, rather than from outside factors.
But it’s unclear whether we can actually separate internal factors from external ones.
A group of friends pressuring you to get high is an external factor,
but your desire to conform, or maybe your desire not to care what others think of you, comes from within you.
Or does it?
Internal External Factors
Isn’t your personality – and how you respond to different situations – shaped by your parents, and friends, and earlier experiences?
Many think these kinds of examples reveal deep problems with compatibilism.
If we can’t separate internal and external causes, maybe the answer is to simply say that actions are “more or less free.”
And how free they are depends on how many internal factors are influencing us,
and how many external, and how much control we really have over what we do.
This is the view taken by contemporary Canadian-American philosopher Patricia Churchland.
Churchland points out that, as social animals, we can’t help but hold people accountable, and assign either praise or blame for their actions.
But it also makes sense to think about how much, or how little, someone is in control of their actions, when assigning praise or blame.
Patricia Churchland
After all, some actions are beyond our control, like sneezing.
So I won’t blame you for sneezing, because you can’t really control that.
But I definitely will blame you for sneezing on my lunch, because you do have control over where you sneeze.
Likewise, I might blame you less for rude behavior when you’ve been drinking, as opposed to when you’re sober,
but I probably won’t let you completely off the hook, because, at least under normal circumstances, you had control over your decision to drink.
So, Churchland says, asking “Am I free?” is really the wrong question.
Instead, we should be asking, “How much control do I have?”
And the more control we have, the more responsibility we also have.
This view lets us keep what we know about the deterministic nature of the universe,
while also making sense of our subjective feeling of freedom.
So really, “feeling free” really just means “having control”
We know disturbances in the brain can undermine our control, from seizures and tics to the pedophilic impulses that developed in the brain tumor patient.
But we also know that our brains can be trained to develop control over many aspects of our behavior.
Like the way you used to just pee whenever your bladder was full, but now you’re able to control when and where you pee.
Congratulations on that, by the way.
But this means that we can choose to develop stronger levels of control over many of our actions,
which is what we do when we work to break a bad habit, or ingrain a good one.
Now, libertarians will point out that being caused to do something by internal factors still keeps our actions from being truly free.
These folks won’t be satisfied with Churchland’s answer, because it says that every one of our choices is still determined by something.
So we can’t ever make an undetermined choice.
But today, whether determined or not, we talked about compatibilism.
We considered whether our internally motivated actions can be understood as free in a deterministic world.
We also talked about Frankfurt Cases.
And we looked at Patricia Churchland’s rejection of the free-or-not-free dichotomy and her
focus on the amount of control we have over our actions.
Next time we’re going to move into a new unit, on the philosophy of language.
This episode is brought to you by Squarespace.
Squarespace helps to create websites, blogs or online stores for you and your ideas.
Websites look professionally designed regardless of skill level, no coding required.
Try Squarespace at squarespace.com/crashcourse for a special offer.
Squarespace: share your passion with the world.
Crash Course Philosophy is produced in association with PBS Digital Studios.
You can head over to their channel and check out a playlist of the latest episodes from shows like
PBS Game / Show, The Good Stuff, and Gross Science.
This episode of Crash Course was filmed in the Doctor Cheryl C. Kinney Crash Course Studio
with the help of these awesome people and our equally fantastic graphics team is Thought Cafe.


Introduction
Newtonian Determinism says that the universe is a clock, a gigantic clock that’s wound
up in the beginning of time and has been ticking ever since according to Newton’s laws of
motion.
So what you’re going to eat 10 years from now on January 1st has already been fixed.
It’s already known using Newton’s laws of motion.
Einstein
Einstein believed in that.
Einstein was a determinist.
Does that mean that a murderer, this horrible mass murderer isn’t really guilty of his
works because he was already preordained billions of years ago?
Einstein said well yeah, in some sense that’s true that even mass murderers were predetermined,
but he said, they should still be placed in jail.
Heisenberg then comes along and proposes the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle and says:
”Nonsense.
There is uncertainty.
Heisenberg
You don’t know where the electron is.
It could be here, here or many places simultaneously.”
This of course Einstein hated because he said God doesn’t play dice with the universe.
Well hey, get used to it.
Einstein was wrong.
God does play dice.
Every time we look at an electron it moves.
There is uncertainty with regards to the position of the electron.
So what does that mean for free will?
It means in some sense we do have some kind of free will.
No one can determine your future events given your past history.
There is always the wildcard.
There is always the possibility of uncertainty in whatever we do.
So when I look at myself in a mirror I say to myself what I'm looking at is not really
me.
It looks like me, but it’s not really me at all.
It’s not me today now.
It’s me a billionth of a second ago because it takes a billionth of a second for light
to go from me to the mirror and back.


Intro
The future is determined by the past, except  for random quantum jumps which no one can  
control. Causes have causes have causes, and  they go back all the way to the Big Bang.  
Does that mean we have no free will? People  often ask me that. I find the question stunningly  
uninteresting. Of course we don’t have free  will. Ok, then, how do we make decisions? Do  
we make decisions? Did the Big Bang make me do  this video? That’s what we’ll talk about today.
Has Physics Ruled Out Free Will?
I already made a video about free will a  few years ago. But I’ve noticed recently  
that a lot of people think free will is  relevant for addressing climate change.  
And because I don’t believe in free  will I’ve suddenly become a problem.  
This is complete nonsense. But  let’s start at the beginning.
And we begin of course with physics. Everything  in the universe is made of 25 particles that,  
Physics FTW!
for all we currently know, are not themselves  made of any smaller constituents. We collect  
them in what’s called the standard model  of particle physics. That’s everything  
in the universe, except possibly dark  matter, but that’s a different story.
Most of those particles are unstable and  decay very quickly. How can it be that  
a particle which isn’t made of anything can  decay? That’s a question I get so frequently,  
I made a video about that specifically.
For now, let’s stick with the particles that are  stable. Those are the ones that we are made of,  
electrons, up and down quarks,  and photons and gluons to hold  
them together. And good thing they’re  stable because otherwise you’d be more  
radiant than a nuclear fuel rod.  You’d also be dead very quickly.
Ok, so humans are one big collection of  particles. What the particles do is described  
by the mathematics of the standard model. It’s  a lot of maths, and you need that maths if you  
want to answer difficult questions like what’s  going on in LHC collisions. For simple questions,  
like whether free will exists, we don’t need to  know much about the maths. Relevant is just that,  
ultimately, what you and I do is  also described by the standard model.
And yes, that means that we know  the equations for human behaviour.  
We can write them down. In practice,  that’s a completely useless statement,  
because we can’t solve the equations for  all these 10 to the 30 or so particles that  
humans are made of. Not even the biggest  supercomputer in the world could do that.
But we don’t need to solve the equations to  draw conclusions from their properties. For the  
purposes of this video, the most relevant property  of these equations is that they are deterministic,  
which means that if you know the properties  and motions of the particles at one time,  
you can calculate what happens at any later time. Ok, it isn’t quite as simple. Because this is  
quantum physics, so on top of this deterministic  behaviour, there’s an occasional quantum jump  
which happens randomly whenever you make  a measurement. Y’all know that I don’t  
believe this stuff with the quantum jumps.  But today I’ll stick with the most generally  
accepted theory. So, we have particles that  behave deterministically plus random jumps.
In quantum mechanics we use wave-functions to  describe the particles, and this implies that  
there are some quantities, like position  and momentum, whose values you can’t know  
precisely at the same time. But the wave-function  still changes deterministically. If you want,  
you can include gravity, but that is just a  deterministic theory. A non-quantum theory,  
or a “classical” theory as physicists say. So,  gravity just adds some more determinism on top.
And that’s how the universe works,  for all we currently know. It’s one  
big wave-function that contains all  those particles. Its change in time  
is deterministic with the occasional random  jump. The deterministic part is fixed by the  
past. The random jumps cannot be influenced  by anything because that’s what it means for  
them to be random. And that’s it. Please don’t  blame me for this. I swear it wasn’t my idea.
Emergence
Physics is great, but it doesn’t tell you much  about human anatomy, other than possibly that  
flapping your arms won’t make you fly. That’s  because if you combine many particles, then  
things get very complicated very quickly. You get  new, “emergent” behaviour as it’s often called.
You don’t even need to look at difficult things  like human beings to see that. If you do as much  
as combine atoms to big chunks called metals  you get new behaviour, like the ability to  
conduct electricity. Or being very shiny. Or  being very painful if they fall on your foot. 
Emergent properties don’t exist  on the level of the constituents,  
they arise from the properties and  interactions of the constitution. A  
single electron doesn’t have a conductivity.  That just doesn’t make sense. Conductivity  
is a property that only makes sense  for large collections of electrons.
It doesn’t make sense to talk about the  conductivity of an electron for the same  
reason it doesn’t make sense to ask whether  a single oxygen atom is a gas, or what’s the  
marital status of your small intestine. It’s  what philosophers call a “category error”. It’d  
be trying to assign a property to a class to  which it doesn’t belong. Emergent properties  
don’t make sense on the underlying levels. But  that doesn’t mean they don’t exist. Chairs exist,  
alright, but they exist on the macroscopic level,  and not on the level of elementary particles.
Curiously enough, our universe is organized  so that the details of what happens at short  
distances become less important at large  distances. This is why, if you want to  
understand planetary motion you don’t need to  know the population of New York City. This is why,  
if you want to understand chemical reactions you  don’t need to know the standard model of particle  
physics. And this is why, if you want to become  a YouTuber, you don’t need to know anything.
Physicists call it the “decoupling of  scales”, the mysterious but empirically  
well-confirmed fact that the details  of what goes on small scales can be  
disregarded if you’re only interested  in what happens on large scales. And  
this is why we have so many disciplines  of science. Because each discipline of  
science has its own language about emergent  properties that are adequate to its subject.
But that we get new, emergent, properties  from the interactions of the constituents,  
doesn’t mean the equations that determine  the behaviour of the constituents no longer  
apply. Emergent behaviour is a consequence  of combining large numbers of particles with  
complicated interactions. It *follows from the  underlying laws, it doesn’t make them go away. 
Some philosophers have speculated that large  systems could have emergent behaviours which  
*don’t follow from the laws of the  constituents. This is sometimes  
called “strong emergence”. But there is no  evidence this happens in the real world.
Though there are some mathematical  examples. If you have an infinite  
number of constituents or an infinite  number of properties of the constituents,  
or anything else being actually infinite,  there are cases where it becomes impossible  
to calculate one or the other quantity of the  entire system. A few examples for this have  
been constructed in the literature. Usually, the  proof works by a map to the halting problems or  
similar examples of computational complexity.  However, those are mathematical constructions  
that have no real-world counterpart because in  the real world nothing is ever truly infinite.
Ok, so emergent properties are an interesting  consequence of the underlying laws, but we’re  
still governed by a mix of determinism and  indeterminism. What does this mean for free will?
Free Will?
Free will is often described as the  possibility that one could have done  
otherwise. But this description stopped  being useful with quantum mechanics,  
because it’d mean that single  particles also have free will.
If you take for example a photon, a single quantum  of light, and you send it through a beam splitter,  
then there’s a 50 percent chance the  photon goes left and 50 percent chance  
the photon goes right. If you measure  the photon on the left you can say, well,  
it could have done otherwise. It could have gone  right, right? Does that mean it has free will?  
Well, I’d say that’s not what  normal people would call free will,  
though some physicists actually believe that  photons are observers. One of the consequences  
of that is that they’ve concluded reality doesn’t  exist. I talked about this in an earlier video.
This is also what happens in the “Free Will  Theorem”. This theorem was mathematically  
proved by John Conway and Simon Kochen in  2006. It says that if humans have free will,  
then elementary particles also have free will.  But the statement of the theorem is logically  
equivalent to the statement, “If particles do  not have free will, then neither have humans.”  
I don’t know about you, but to  me it seems reasonable to assume  
that particles do not have free  will. And either way you put it,  
the free will theorem says nothing about the  existence of free will in the first place.
So let’s return to the question of what we mean  by free will. We have seen that the idea that you  
could have done otherwise or that your actions  were not determined is not descriptive because  
of this random element from quantum mechanics.  Contemporary philosophers have therefore tried to  
capture the essence of free will in the idea  that human decisions are to a large extent  
independent from external factors, and instead  dominantly driven by internal deliberation.
Different philosophers have put  somewhat different spins on this  
story. But it always comes down to the  idea that human decisions are difficult,  
if not impossible, to predict from  external input and observations alone.
The philosopher Daniel Dennett for example  captures the essence of free will in our  
“ability to see probable futures – futures  that seem like they’re going to happen” and  
then the possibility to take steps that  something else happens instead, like,  
for example an autonomous vehicle does.  The philosopher Jennan Ismael has even  
written a book called “How Physics Makes Us  Free”. She basically says that free will lies  
in the large degree of autonomy that our brain  has from environmental factors as it operates.
Those are typical examples of  what is called “compatibilism”,  
that’s the philosophy that free will is  compatible with the laws of nature as they are,  
a mixture of determinism and indeterminism. Most  contemporary philosophers are compatibilists.  
According to a 2020 survey, almost 60  percent. But it’s not like this is a new idea,  
well known philosophers like David Hume  and John Stuart Mill were compatibilists.
The other big camp is that of libertarianism,  whose supporters also believe in free will.  
Their philosophy comes in several variants.  First, there are those who insist that  
the randomness of quantum mechanics  makes place for free will. As I said,  
I don’t see how this makes sense. Then there  are those who acknowledge that an element of  
indeterminism doesn’t entail free will, but  who then throw out some established science to  
make place for miracles. Like for example the  ability to change the past by your thoughts.
And then there are those who just insist that free  will exists but it’s nonphysical. The latter is  
a well-trodden road. For example, Rene Descartes  and Immanuel Kant were both in that camp. I’d say  
the idea is not wrong, but I never understood  what the point is. Because if free will is not  
physical it doesn’t explain anything in the  physical world, so why bother inventing it?
I am in neither of those camps. The science  writer John Horgan once called me a “free  
will denier”. I think that’s a misunderstanding.  It’s not that I’m denying people feel like they  
have free will. But I’m with libertarians  in that I think free will is incompatible  
with determinism. I also think it’s  incompatible with indeterminism. And  
since the real world is governed by a mixture  of determinism and indeterminism, I arrive at  
the conclusion that free will doesn’t exist.  It’s sometimes called “hard incompatibilism”.
The good thing about hard incompatibilism is that  
you don’t need to explain what free will  is in any detail. You just need to say:  
whatever it is, it isn’t compatible with  what we know about the laws of nature.
That said, I don’t have a problem  with compatibilism. If you want  
to define whatever as free will, please go ahead,  
it’s just a definition after all. If your  definition leads you to the conclusion that  
photons also have free will I’d find that a  tad bit ridiculous but maybe that’s just me. 
I should add that when neurologist discuss  the question of free will they talk about  
something else entirely. They are concerned  with the question whether we make decisions  
consciously or unconsciously. Interesting  question, but not what I’m talking about today
I recently gave an interview and the guy  said to me if free will doesn’t exist,  
Decisions, Decisions
why don’t I kill myself tomorrow because what’s  the point of anything. This isn’t a joke,  
it actually happened. It wasn’t even the first  time people said something like this to me.  
And I’m afraid it won’t be the last time. Which  is why I’m here talking about free will again.
I’m not a psychologist. I’m a physicist.  I don’t know what to say to people who  
have existential angst other than,  please see a psychologist. I’m not  
a philosopher either. For what I am  concerned, if free will doesn’t exist,  
it’s never existed, so what difference  could it possibly make for your life.
I believe the problem is that many of  us have grown up thinking our brain  
works in a particular way. Then we learn  that this isn’t compatible with science,  
and we have a hard time readjusting  how we think about ourselves.
The free will story suggests that the brain  works like this. You use your neural circuits  
to consider different options, for example, what  you could eat for lunch. You draw on your memory,  
and the associations you have for each  possible option, and try to imagine how  
much you would enjoy it. Then you take this  thing called “free will” and use it to pick one.  
The challenge is now to integrate  the knowledge that the thing you  
call free will is just another part of this  algorithm that runs in your neural circuits.
A good way I’ve found to make sense of this goes  back to Wittgenstein. We can’t know the result  
of a calculation that our brain performs before  we have completed the calculation. If we did,  
we wouldn’t have to do the calculation.  This is why we have the impression that the  
decision is “free” until we’ve arrived at the  conclusion. But the result ultimately follows  
from deterministic brain functions,  with the occasional random element.
If that sounds weird, all it means is  that our decisions follow from what we  
want. And I think that’s a good thing. I’d  find it creepy if there was something else,  
call it free will or whatever, that  would affect the decisions in my brain. 
So that you don’t have free will doesn’t  mean you don’t make decisions. Of course,  
you make decisions. You decided to watch this  video, didn’t you? Good choice by the way.
Did the Big Bang made me do this video?  
No. That’s because all those structures in the  universe, including this planet and life on it,  
were created by quantum fluctuations in the  plasma in the early universe. Their details  
were not determined at the Big Bang, if there  was a Big Bang. It’s also extremely likely that  
one or the other quantum event played a role for  the world becoming just exactly as it is today.
Why does it matter? It matters because  to come to good decisions we need to  
Why Does it Matter?
understand how our own brain works, and how  society works overall. And the idea of free  
will suggests an inaccurate description  of reality. It makes people believe they  
have more control over what goes on  in their head than is really the case.
Fact is that our brains will process input  whether we want that or not. Once it’s in,  
we can’t get it out. This is why trauma is so hard  to cope with. This is why misinformation is so  
hard to combat. This is why what the FIFA called  “three victorious hands around a soccer ball”  
will forever look like a facepalm once someone  told you it does. You can’t “unsee” something.
And this is also why I take issue with upbeat  climate change activists, who attack realists  
as “doomers” because they believe we just  need the “will” to take action. The idea  
that “will” is all we need has led to utopian  plans for staggering amounts of carbon capture,  
home insulation and renovation, upgrades  of the electric grid, energy storage,  
and a hydrogen economy, all of which is  somehow magically supposed to pop out  
of nowhere if we just have the “will”.  This belief in free will puts the blame  
on individuals when really the problem is  the way that we’ve organized our societies.
I’d say it isn’t me who is a problem for  action on climate change, it’s people who  
disregard the limits of human cognitive  ability. I have a chapter about free will  
in my book “Existential Physics” where I also  discuss the question of moral responsibility,  
so if you want to know more, go check this out.
Learn More With Brilliant
The reason why the laws of physics are  deterministic, plus that random element,  
is that they are based on differential  equations. If you want to know more  
about how they work, there’s a great course  about differential equations on Brilliant. 
Brilliant.org offers courses on a large variety  of topics in science and mathematics. It’s a  
fresh and new approach to learning with  interactive visualizations and follow-up  
questions. I’ve found it to be a highly effective  way to understand and also to remember material.  
If you want to know more about the physics  behind this video, check out for example  
their course on differential equations.  It’s full of examples from many different  
areas of science and it gives you a step-by-step  guide to understanding how these equations work.
If you want to know more about quantum  mechanics, you might want to try my course,  
that’s an introduction to quantum mechanics.  It starts from the very basics and doesn’t  
require you to bring background knowledge.  My course covers topics such as interference,  
superpositions and entanglement, the uncertainty  principle, and Bell’s theorem. And afterwards,  
maybe you want to continue learning more  about quantum computing or special relativity. 
If you're interested in trying Brilliant out, use  our link Brilliant.org slash Sabine and sign up  
for free. You'll get to try out everything  Brilliant has to offer for 30 days, and the  
first 200 subscribers using this link will get  20 percent off the annual premium subscription.
Thanks for watching, see you next week.


Good morning everybody, my name is Alex
and perhaps because of my impending examinations
and the very real possibility of failure
I have been thinking a lot about the concept of free will and whether any of us
can be really held accountable for our actions. Now
I've already made a video discussing
the implications of life without free will with my
friend Steven from Rationality rules
who also recently discussed free will with Matt Dillahunty
and made his own video on the topic as well
(links are of course in the description)
but I realized that I've never actually talked openly about why
I don't believe in free will
except from my somewhat obscure book review of Sam
Harris's book on my website so
I thought that today would be the day. Why?
Well, I-I don't know, and, well, I can't know.
That's kind of the thing.
I'd recommend that you watch Steven's video which outlines some of the
more scientific arguments against
free will, but to compliment that video
I want to take a more philosophical and purely logical approach to the problem
it seems to me that whilst helpful and endlessly interesting,
it isn't necessary to reference neuroscience to make
a good case against free will, so I won't be doing that today.
Now one of the best-known current critics
of free will is of course Sam Harris, whose short book you should
all read, it's what really
got me thinking about this originally about a year ago
and who is of course a neuroscientist. But you can also find discussions
of free will in the works of earlier philosophers like
Bertrand Russell, and for this video I'll be all but ignoring
neuroscience. Again, that perspective is covered well by Steven.
So, with that out of the way, let's get into this.
Here is my case against free will.
The first issue that we have to face is of course the definition of
free will. And since, when I'm debating this,
I'm the one who's denying the existence of
something that someone else believes in, it really needs to be
that someone else's definition that I'm using.
Which is why a video like this can be quite tricky.
Now this doesn't absolve me of the burden of proof, unlike my
passive atheism. I make the active claim that I think
free will does not exist
but I can only do this once I'm sure that we all mean the same
thing by free will.
So for ease's sake, I'll go with the most succinct and
least controversial definition that I've been able to come up with, which is this:
free will is the ability to have acted differently.
And what I mean by this is
that if we were to wind back the clock in any situation,
it was completely within the realm of
possibility for you to have acted differently.
to the way that you actually did.
For instance, it would have been completely possible for me to have said ,
"bonjour,"at the beginning of this video instead of good morning,
and the choice to say the latter
was completely within my control.
The idea is that you are in control of your actions, and
any decisions that you make are determined only by your own conscious self.
But the thing is,
there are so many things wrong with this that it's difficult to know where to start.
I'll borrow a line of thought from Doctor Harris here.
Let's begin by considering what would have to be true
in order for us to truly have total free will–
to be able to have acted differently
Well firstly, we would need to be aware of
everything that is influencing our actions, including
environmental factors, our precise mood,
the influence of other people, the influence of past experiences, and more.
Secondly, we would need to be in complete control of every one of them
Neither of these are true, or even possible.
Now, you might concede this, but not think it a problem.
Okay, you say, so I can't control all of the factors that
led me to like the taste of ice cream, but
on a more mundane level, I'm still in complete control over
whether I choose chocolate or vanilla.
Not so fast. Again, consider this most simple of choices:
Chocolate or vanilla.
Or, if it's easier, consider the last mundane choice that you had to make.
(Walk or drive this morning, go out or stay in tonight)
Think about why you chose one or would choose one
over the other.
So what would make me choose vanilla over chocolate?
Well there is only one possible answer, which I'll elaborate on shortly.
I would need to want it more than chocolate.
In order to choose vanilla,
I'd need to want vanilla,
but... is this something I can control?
Can I control what it is that I want?
Not a chance
Consider the fact that you, presumably,
don't want to punch your mother in the face.
Can you choose to want to do that?
This isn't the same thing as choosing to do it; could you choose to want to?
No, no more than I could choose to want vanilla over chocolate.
I just want chocolate more than vanilla
That's just a fact about myself that I can't change.
But okay, let's go further, you say.
Of course I can't choose to want vanilla over chocolate when I really want chocolate, but
What if I just decided, in the full knowledge that I prefer chocolate,
to go for vanilla anyway,
just for the sake of regaining my free will and nothing else.
Well, I'm afraid you'd still face the same problem,
the exact same problem, in fact.
In order to do that, you'd need to "want" to regain your free will, as you see it.
Why is your desire to prove
a point like this stronger than the desire to
to have the ice cream you prefer?
It just is, and if it happened not to be,
you'd have chosen the ice cream that you do prefer.
The key takeaway is this: you cannot determine your wants.
Think of something you want. Try to not want it.
Think of something you don't want and try to want it. It's not possible.
And even if it were,
in order to change a don't want into a want,
you'd need to want to want it.
And vice versa. To change a want into a don't want,
you'd need to want to not want it.
You simply can't control what you want.
Now, that's one piece of the puzzle, and it may seem odd to leave it there, but
just wait until we put them together.
Okay the next piece of the puzzle is to convince you of this fact:
There are only two reason– two reasons, none more, in
any circumstances for which you will ever [purposefully] do anything.
In fact, it's impossible for you to ever do anything
for any reason other than one of these two.
And those two reasons are: because you want to, or because you're forced to.
And this is fundamentally important and worth really understanding and thinking about
You will only ever do anything in your entire life
because you either want to or are forced to.
That's it. No exceptions.
And because of the fact that nobody seems to believe me on this point at first,
I'll give you a common objection that I hear all the time.
In fact, I recently spoke to ex-NFL player Arian Foster
about free will on his podcast.
(Link, again, will be in the description once it's up)
And he, playing Devil's advocate, brought up the following:
Consider exercise. Consider going to the gym.
Most people don't want to go to the gym, but they do it anyway.
Surely this is an example of someone doing something freely,
and not because they want to
or because they're forced to.
Not really.
Because there has to be a reason for going to the gym,
and for most people, and for Arian, it's something like to stay healthy,
to stay in shape, to live longer, whatever it may be.
So, we have to ask again
the same fundamental question:
why is the desire to stay healthy stronger than the desire to go to the gym?
It just is. Or maybe it isn't.
And some people stay at home and eat junk food instead.
For these people, why is the desire to sit around
or to eat junk food stronger than the desire to be healthy?
It just is.
Again, remember you can't control the strength or object of your desires.
It's they that control you.
And if that doesn't unease you,
repeat those words again to yourself until it does.
So even when you "don't want" to do something, but you do it anyway,
this is only ever because of a stronger and equally uncontrollable desire
to do something that requires you to do it.
In other words, all of your actions really are controlled by your wants.
And I really mean this.
This is what really convinced me of the nonexistence of free will.
If you aren't convinced that everything you do is either because you want to or because you're forced to,
Please, just pause the video and really think about this.
I promise that any example you can think of
has a hidden want lying behind it.
Leave an example in the comments if you have to. I'm sure someone else can find it if you can't.
So now, as promised, let's start putting this together.
There are two reasons you will ever do anything:
because you want to, or because you're forced to.
Of course, if you're forced to do something, then you're definitely not acting freely,
and nobody would deny that,
so that just leaves your wants.
But... well, we've already concluded that you can't control your wants,
so actions motivated by wants aren't really free either.
So being forced to do something isn't free will,
and wanting to do something isn't free will.
But being forced or wanting to do something
are the only reasons why you do anything.
Hence, free will is conclusively
an illusion. Now I use the word illusion purposefully here.
One thing that nobody needs convincing of is the fact that we all feel like we do have free will
I certainly do, and so does Sam Harris, and so did Bertrand Russel as far as I know.
But then, I suppose, so would an
artificial intelligence that we've
programmed to feel as though it does have control.
And what really is the difference between a mind made of silicon
and one made of flesh
in relation to liberty of thought? Well,
That's a topic for another video, or perhaps an episode of black mirror,
but you can see that this illusion is incredibly important,
so I just want to briefly explain why I think we feel this illusion.
So firstly, and most obviously,
it's easy to see that this illusion
is mightily beneficial to our evolution as a species,
and I personally have a similar speculative view of the emergence of free will
to my view on the emergence of consciousness as a whole:
that it only exists because it aids our survival,
but it's become so complex and engrained in our biology
that we feel strangely apart from it and have developed the fortunate
or unfortunate side effect of self-awareness, depending on who you ask.
But more than this, I think it's because there really is a difference between jumping and being pushed.
That is, there is a difference in experience between being forced to do something
and doing something because you want to.
And this is something that Matt Dillahunty has alluded to, and in fact,
I'll play a short clip of him here.
Now this sound byte was also responded to by Steven in a response that he made to Matt,
a third video he has done on the topic.
But again, though agreeing entirely with Steven,
I have more to add as well.
"I'm talking about it from a conceptual standpoint.
The example that I'd used in New York was
If Sam jumped off stage, that would be
him as an agent taking an act of volition. It doesn't matter if it was predetermined by the universe or not."
But alternately, I could throw him off the stage.
And the difference between those two events sums up everything that I think is valuable
about the notion of free will."
Now this is why I wanted to be precise in my definition of free will,
because for many people,
the first definition they think of
is "the ability to do whatever you want,"
but I think this is misleading.
This, however, is the definition I think Matt is implicitly using here, and I'll explain why.
To be clear, I don't think Matt is wrong, per se,
and his conversation with Steven cleared a lot of this up, but
this clip is still representative of a popular view nonetheless.
The reason I think there's an experiential difference between jumping and being pushed
is because if you're defining free will as "the ability to do whatever you want,"
then you're exercising free will by jumping, but not by being pushed.
But just think about that definition.
What does it mean to do whatever you want?
Remember, you can't control your wants,
so by doing what you want,
you're just acting in accordance with something that's out of your control.
It's more accurate to say, rather than you can do whatever you want,
that you can only do what you want.
Of course that's true; we've already covered this.
And it's not freedom to be told, "you can do anything,
as long as it's this."
The takeaway from my video today to conclude this whole complicated and fearful affair,
should be this:
Yes, you can do whatever you want.
You just can't choose what it is that you want.
And where's the freedom in that?
If this video convinced you, consider why.
If not, consider why not.
It's out of your control. What I'm saying will either convince you,
or it won't, and you don't get to decide on that.
But, whichever way you fall, why not try exercising your free will by hitting subscribe,
and by watching my discussion with Steven about the moral implications of all this.
And be sure to watch his free will debunked video, too,
which should clear up any other objections that you might have.
For instance, you think that randomness at the quantum level solves the problem?
Well...
Just watch his video, and
if I was really unoriginal, I'd say "after all you have no choice!"
But that's where I'll end this video for now. Why?
I don't know. Why am I still talking?
Why will I stop when I eventually do stop?
I don't know. I just will.
I will, but not freely.
See you in the next one.


well so taking the red pill on on free
will
makes you much more forgiving of a lot
of the stuff yeah because you see just
every one is an open system
no one authored themselves well one
created themselves no one no one can
directly regulate the effect that of
every influence that they had or didn't
have you know it's like you are the
totality of what brought you here I mean
the universe is sort of just pushed you
to this point in time and the only thing
you've got is your brain and it states
and that is that is based on your genes
and the totality of environmental
influences you you as a system have have
had working on you up until this moment
and so the next words that come out of
your mouth are part of that process
now the people some people find this to
be a you know frankly demoralizing
picture or like I think well okay well
I'm you're telling me telling me I'm
just a robot but you're a robot that is
open continuously open to influence to
the influence of you know internally
based on its own processes I mean it's
like there's top-down control of you
know executive function in the brain to
your you know your emotional life say
and you're continually open to the
influences of culture right you know the
culture is this operating system that
you're interacting with in each moment
and whatever is getting in can change
you in radical ways very quickly there's
no telling how much you can change on
the basis of one new idea coming your
way right now I would argue that the
that process of change and if I say
something that changes your view on
anything that's not evidence of free
will that is evidence of just yet more
causality I mean you don't you don't
pick the changes that come your way if I
if I get you to see something that you
didn't see a moment before you're not
responsible for the fact that you didn't
see it a moment before and you're not
responsible for the fact that you now
see it it's just like the dominoes just
kept falling right right
but it does give you this a far more
patient sense of one just it just you
know all the causes and conditions that
that have created this this odious
behavior you're now disposed to react to
in the world right like like you can
everything on some level is more of a
force of nature than it is something
that you need to take personally it's
like if there's a hurricane blowing
outside we don't respond to it the same
way we would respond to you know al
Qaeda dropping a bomb on us right it
might it might create the same amount of
damage but the in in the in the latter
case where we have an identified entity
right we feel like okay now we're in the
presence of human evil and we have to go
kill these [ __ ] right now we
may have to kill them right because that
may be the only way of putting out this
this you know stopping the damage
they're they're committed to causing but
and we would kill hurricanes if we could
kill them right I mean we would you know
we would nullify them but the feeling we
have in both cases is very different the
feeling you have attributing ultimate
authorship to a person's behavior is
super narrow psychologically and
ethically and it's you know the feeling
of vengeance right like like you don't
you you don't you have a you this
feeling of vengeance is so natural to
get triggered in response to a person
it's not natural in response to a wild
animal who may have done something
terrible
right I mean like you would like I mean
there's been examples of this where
people have taken vengeance on animals
and it just looks like a kind of moral
dysfunction on the part of the people
who did it I mean there's a famous
picture of a an elephant that got hung
from a railroad crane I think back in
the 20s right so like this is a circus
elephant escaped and it ran you know
rampage through the streets and it
trampled you know a few people and that
and the people in the in the town I
don't know where this was it was a
Baltimore or someplace
we're so outraged that they've decided
to lynch the elephant right
like and yet that's there's something
uncanny about that sort of
misappropriation of agency to an
elephant what is a what is a mistreated
circus elephant gonna do when it gets
out and it's terrified and it's trying
to get away from people it's going to
trample a few people so we have a very
different set of books we keep ethically
for humans and but some of its
understandable some of its inevitable
but a lot of it gives us moral illusions
that we don't need to have and it gives
it it gives us a kind of just an
inability to take stock of all the
variables that are actually guiding
human behavior and react to them and
mitigate them and disincentivize them
intelligently I mean punishment makes
sense not because people really really
deserve at bottom whatever their
punishments are it doesn't make sense in
a in a retro retributive paradigm it
makes sense if if it's the the best tool
to discourage dangerous behavior and it
works right so it's like you know if
you're if you're gonna punish people for
things they can't control well that's
stupid
right because if you you as much as you
punish them that you're not going to
you're not going to moderate the
behavior so you have to punish people
for things that are actually under
voluntary control and it only it only
makes sense if it's the only tool to do
the job and if the moment you have I
mean this is a may have brought this up
last time we spoke about free will but
this is really the sort of reductio ad
absurdum of where most people are on
this topic the moment we really
understand human evil at the level of
the brain the moment we understand
psychopathy se which is maybe that's not
the totality of evil but let's you know
certainly Center the bullseye once we
understand psychopathy is a neurological
condition that's governed by genes and
environment and we can we can actually
intrude at the level of the brain to
mitigate it so like so so compa the--
becomes a disease right it becomes a an
injuries a syndrome right that we can
fix and let's say it's let's say it's a
very simple fix let's say it's a pill
right let's say it's just a
neurotransmitter
bitter imbalance in the presence of that
breakthrough we will feel very
differently about that species of human
evil we will not judge it in the same
way will because what will happen is
you'll give people the pill and they'll
say [ __ ] I can't believe I was that
dangerous [ __ ] like I gotta thank you
for like like I I'm as horrified by who
I was before you cured me as you were
right
and it's totally soso suck psychopathy
in the presence of a cure for it would
look much more like diabetes than it
looks like evil in the present case and
people aren't imagining what it would
like what it would be like to be there
what it would be like to actually fully
understand the under underlying
neurophysiology here and actually have
something that means there's no
guarantee we'll be able to to deal with
it in a simple way but it's certainly
possible and I mean the classic example
is just like the Charles Whitman example
where you know you have a brain tumor
that's causing this aberrant behavior in
that case everyone everyone sees okay
this is not evil this is a brain tumor
that's the tower shooter yeah yeah back
in 64 I think and so but in the same way
that a brain tumor tumors exculpatory
there I think a full understanding of
the underlying neurology would be
exculpatory again it doesn't mean you in
the meantime but you know before we get
there we obviously we have to lock up
dangerous people if there's no way to to
help them but the more we see the causes
the more we view this in terms of just
sheer bad luck right like like there are
there are people who when they're adults
are quintessentially evil who we and
they they provoke the greatest feeling
of vengeance from us but if you just
walk back their timeline you recognize
that at a certain they were four years
old at one point right they were the
four year old who was destined to become
this terrible person right it's an
unlucky four-year-old right you know and
so at what point where's the bright line
that says okay here's the point where
it's appropriate to just hate this
person and feel no compassion and it on
the other side of this line you should
just feel compassion because this person
is unlucky there is no such line and a
complete understanding of this life line
in in scientific terms would obliterate
any line you think you have right it
would just be this cascade of causation
and you know adding randomness to the
picture doesn't help right it's just
it's random this is just you know
somebody is in your brain rolling dice
and influencing your behavior that way
well that's that doesn't give you the
the free will people think they have so
there isn't there's ironically there is
what seems on some level deflationary of
the the the the gravitas of the human
spirit for people opens the door to at
least in my view a far more ethical and
tolerant and patient and understanding
view of you know human failings and
human frailty and and just and then at
that point you can just have a
conversation about what's pragmatic what
works what helps people change like in
this this person over here who's doing
terrible things is there something we
can do to make him a better person
well if there is let's do that without
all the judgment wouldn't it be amazing
if that's how we treated these public
shaming events like wouldn't wouldn't it
be amazing if we gave someone an
opportunity to say this is this is what
I did this is how awful I feel about
this I would never do that again I'm a
different person that was 20 years ago
whatever it is and and have everybody
join in hey anyone could be you thank
you for being honest about who you are
now thank you for evolving thank you for
expressing yourself in a way that maybe
other people who have also committed
really on just unsavory or just
unfortunate things in the past
unfortunate acts in the past they can
feel relieved by the fact that you've
grown and evolved to become a better
person oh yeah and that you're you're a
different thing now and you are the
product of all of your experiences
you're not you're not this one thing
you're not stuck in who you were when
you were 16 years old but if you were
marky-mark and you hit that guy with a
stick whatever you know whatever he did
you know you're not stuck in that spot
forever these don't mark it's not a
Scarlet Letter it's done a mark on your
forehead that you keep for life yeah I
mean think about the Liam Neeson
incident which I find so interesting is
that there's a case where I mean what
he's revealing about himself is is
pretty amazing right it's like it's like
he just decided okay we need a a Truth
and Reconciliation Commission for who I
used to be right you know and just
volunteered this and for me like you
know uh I don't actually understand that
State of Mind I mean there many aberrant
states of mind that I can understand I
certainly understand what it's like to
want to harm somebody and you know to
feel vengeance and all that but the
instrumental violence piece I don't
understand I've never felt like okay
this type of person wronged me or
someone close to me so any to any person
of that type will do right like that
right but that is such a problem the
world over in human history yes that it
is it is just fascinating ethically for
someone of his you know stature to
reveal that about himself and he put it
in terms of of Honor I mean it was like
it was an honor I mean this is what this
is what what is so dysfunctional about
on our culture right this is what you
this is what we see more in the south
and anywhere else in the country and
this is what you see basically
everywhere you go in the Middle East is
just and this is what Islam inculcates
to a degree that's fairly unmatched in
in its community this notion of honor is
does link up with this tendency to find
satisfaction in instrumental violence
like but when you when you try to run
that software on my brain that just
looks like madness right the idea that
any other person will do right of a
certain type right that's just you know
III don't read that resonates not at all
right and so it's just damn interesting
and the fact that the lesson being
taken from this seems to be this is the
this should be the end of your career
for having talked about this in the way
and again a band you know apologies if
there's some part of the story that I've
gotten wrong I'm not missing or missing
but it seemed to me that he was always
counting this in the the horror and
amazement appropriate to the to the
disclosure like he can't believe he was
inhabiting this state of consciousness
and you know it's just an amazing thing
to reveal about yourself
so yeah and I'm sure he regrets every
second of it yeah and that's that's the
wrong [ __ ] punchline yeah right you
know and the the the thing that should
happen is someone with a lot to lose
should be able to say you know how ugly
a human mind can be this is an
experience I had right this is who I was
and you know how much I have to live for
and how much I have to lose we have to
talk about this kind of mania that can
get humming on a human brain right right
we see this eight every time you open
the paper you see someone in the grip of
this kind of thing right it even
happened to me right I think it's an
amazing conversation to start and the
fact that the result is just you know
and an auto to Faye is is is the problem
we're trying to fight our way through it


Intro
- Your frontal cortex is the part of your brain that is the freest from genetic influences
because it's still being sculpted by environment and experience a quarter-century after you plopped out there
whereas most of the rest of your brain is sculpted by two or three years worth of experience.
Whoa, we evolved, our genes evolved to free our frontal cortex from strict genetic determinism,
and to make it much more sculpted by environmental determinism.
- Today on "Big Think," we delve into a thought-provoking conversation with Dr. Robert Sapolsky. He shares with us his insights
on his concept of free will or the lack thereof, and its profound implications for humanity.
Robert Sapolsky is a distinguished professor at Stanford University, acclaimed for his expertise
in biology, neurology, and neurosurgery. Renowned as a MacArthur Genius Fellow and a research associate at the National Museum of Kenya,
Sapolsky offers a unique perspective on the human condition drawing from over three decades of experience
Who is Robert Sapolsky
as both a field primatologist and a laboratory neuroscientist. Widely hailed as one of the best science writers
of our time, Sapolsky is the author of several bestselling books, including "Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers,"
"The Trouble with Testosterone," and his latest work, "Determined." Dr. Robert Sapolsky,
thank you for joining us on "Big Think" today. - Well, thanks for having me on. It's a pleasure.
- So I'm curious, why did you write this book? - Well, I had no plans to,
in that I thought I had written the necessary book about five years ago or so.
2017, I published a book called "Behave: The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst,"
and it's incredibly- like 800-page nightmare of a book.
And in the aftermath, doing a lot of lecturing about it and one of the themes that comes through in the book
is our behavior is the end product of what happened to us a second ago, a minute ago,
an hour, a year, a decade, a lifetime-all of that. And I figured when I would lecture to audiences about this
and take them through this, they'd all come away saying, "Oh, I get it, there's no free will whatsoever."
And instead, there'd often be questions like, "You know, given all the stuff you were just telling us,
it seems like there might be a little bit less free will than we often think." And I realized, "Oh God, the book was way too subtle.
I have to write one now of just hitting people over the head saying there's no free will, there's no free will."
So that's the follow-up book. - You've written "Behave," you now have "Determined,"
Why we dont have free will
and you've at length explained why we don't have free will. I'm curious if you could provide us
with the most succinct version of that argument for us, just to foreground things for our audience.
- Sure. Everybody thinks they're seeing free will when we choose something.
We're consciously aware of doing it, we know what the consequences are likely to be. Most importantly, we know there's alternatives
available to us. And for most people that's necessary and sufficient, there's free will.
And my whole point is that misses everything that's going on because you're not asking the only important question,
which is: How did you become the sort of person who would have that intent at that point?
And the answer is because of the biology over which you had no control,
interacting with the environment over which you had no control, stretching from one second ago
to the moment you were an fertilized egg. And when you look at how that stuff works,
there's not a crack anywhere in there in which you can insert sort of the everyday intuitive notion of free will.
Language
- One of the things that I think trips people up is just how much our language that we use to describe human action is just laden with meaning
that feels like free will. I'm curious, how much time do you spend thinking about the language that you use to describe human action
and human behaviors so that it can somewhat be divorced or separated from this idea of free will?
- Where people sort of get into terminology troubles there
is a difference between- you can be a causal mechanism.
I could pick up something and I've caused it to move upward in the air. I have caused every molecule in it to move upward.
Is the ability to be a causal agent, causality the same thing as free will?
No, I may choose to do this at this point but that has nothing to do with the issue of
"How did I become the sort of person who would say that to you at this point, and do this with my right hand instead of my left hand,
and not find some item here to lift up at the same time?" And people get gummed up at, yeah, we make choices
and we cause things to happen, and it splits in the road.
We even make decisions as to which thing we're going to make happen, this instead of that.
But again, that's not an issue of demonstrating free will.
Distributed causality
- In preparation for this interview I watched the conversation that you had with Alex O'Connor of the wonderful "Within Reason" podcast.
And in that conversation you use this term 'distributed causality' to describe the multitude of things that can lead up
to a person performing an action or making a decision. And I really wanna dig into that.
What is distributed causality and how does it influence the actions that humans perform
or the decisions that humans make? Hey, Big Thinkers. We're gonna return to the interview
with Robert Sapolsky in a moment but I wanna talk to you about our Big Think membership program. If you wanna dive deeper into Big Think content
you should become a Big Think member and join our members-only community at members.bigthink.com,
where you can watch videos early and unlock full interviews. What is distributed causality
and how does it influence the actions that humans perform or the decisions that humans make?
- Great. Okay. So somebody behaves, does something or other and why did they do that?
Why did that occur? And part of the answer is, "Well, what went on in their neurons
a tenth of a second ago?" But what you're also asking is, "What stimuli in the environment in the previous minutes
got those neurons to do that?" And you're also asking what did this morning's hormone levels have to do with it?
And you're asking what does the plasticity of the brain in the previous months to decades-
trauma, heartache, finding love, finding God-
all of those things change the brain. And then before you know it, you're asking what are the person's adolescence and childhood
and fetal life have to do with it? What are the genes have to do with it? And remarkably, you gotta go even one step further back.
What kind of culture were your ancestors inventing? Parentheses in what sort of ecosystems
'cause that had something to do with it. Culture centuries ago, why is that relevant?
Because your mother mothered you according to the ways in which she was raised in her culture
or translated a different way. Your brain was being constructed at that point
as a function and part of what your ancestors were up to a millennium ago.
And the key thing there in terms of distributed causality is like you're trying to figure out
why somebody did something- and this is someone who had a car accident and had massive amounts of damage to their frontal cortex.
And as a result, they can't regulate their behavior. And it's easy for us to see where
some unacceptable behavior of theirs came from. Yeah, massive brain damage.
There's this big, massive cable of causal explanation
going from that car accident to why they did what they did. Distributed causality is the much harder thing we have
for people where there's not an easy explanation because what you're doing instead
is looking at the gazillion little microscopic threads of influence from your ancestors' culture
and your fetal life and what color underwear you're wearing today and all of these things.
And it's so much harder to not only see all these little microscopic threads,
but to believe that when you put them all together, that is as causative of a cable
as something as simple as like a massive car accident. It's easier for us to see in those cases.
It's really hard to see that there's a gazillion things, each of which contribute one-gazillionth
of a percentage point to explain what went on. - One of the things I was wondering if you could do for us
Phineas Gage
is sort of relay the story of Phineas Gage. He's obviously a famous example in neuroscience, but it seems like it's what I would call
something like concentrated causality where we are able to identify what changed and what the change was to the person's brain.
So do you mind relaying that story for us? - Phineas Gage marks like year zero
that brain science had something important to say about how we become who we are.
1840s: Phineas Gage was a guy working on a railroad crew,
building railroad lines and somebody screwed up something or other with some explosive TNT
and he did something and the result was an explosion that blew a 13-pound, three-foot long iron rod
up through one of his eyes and out the front of his head, landing 50 feet away and taking with it
Phineas Gage's frontal cortex landing out there. And the amazing thing was this shot through
with sufficient force that it like cauterized all the blood vessels, like he wasn't bleeding out
or anything, he was just kind of sitting there saying, "Whoa, that's weird." And like all sorts of people were saying like,
"Whoa, there's a hole going through your eye there up to the top of your head." So they took him to the town doctor
and showing how bizarrely clean of an injury this was. He rode part of the way or he walked part of the way
and he got to the doctor who could finally give like a medical diagnosis. The doctor looked and said, "Whoa, you got a big hole
going on there between your eye and the top of your head." And that was about the state of science at the time.
And the key thing is this sober, reliable guy who was the foreman of the work crew
became this impulsive, foul-mouthed bully doing all sorts of inappropriate stuff,
was unable to keep a work schedule, wasn't able to work for years afterward. And what one had just seen was something or other
in this part of the brain has a whole lot to do with self-control and gratification,
postponement and emotional regulation. And Gage was like the perfect case
of one single unsubtle TNT-driven explosive cause
of his winding up having very poor regulation of his behavior. And what we've learned since then
is look at a gazillion events in fetal life and childhood,
all of which are shaping the frontal cortex into whether it's good at making right decisions or not.
So he's the one everybody learns because it was so dramatic. And yeah, all you do then is look at subtler stuff
and it has the same thing. Your frontal cortex is made of brain stuff
and your ability to do the right thing when that's the harder thing to do is made of brain stuff also.
Brain and environment
- I'd love to dig into some of that brain stuff. And I know other parts of the body and your microbiology
and even your environment can impact this distributed causality. If say there was like an hour or even seconds
prior to an action or a decision being made, what are some like specific systems
that could lead to an individual or a person taking a specific type of action?
- So you've got a nice volunteer and you've given them this task, which is they have to decide
whether or not to shoot somebody under the following circumstance. They have a fraction of a second to look at the person
and to decide if the thing in that person's hand is a cell phone or a handgun.
We know exactly the relevance of this to the real world. And it turns out all sorts of things modulate
people's ability to decide what it is they're seeing in a fraction of a second. Are you hungry?
Are you tired? Are you scared? Are you stressed? Are you in an environment you consider
to be dangerous or benevolent? Is it nighttime? Is it daytime?
And as we know, tragically, what's this person's skin color?
Are they a young male? All of that stuff. And it shows that your brain in a fraction of a second
will make different decisions as to whether or not that's a handgun based on the stuff that's been going on in the previous hour
exactly as you say. What we also know is say if that person,
if they're male, if their testosterone levels had been elevated over the previous 24 hours,
part of the brain would be functioning differently, part of the brain called the amygdala- and what happens is you look at somebody
with a neutral facial expression and you're more likely than average to decide that instead they look threatening.
So you're that much more likely to decide it's a handgun and pull a trigger.
And if you went through trauma, combat trauma a decade ago and had PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder,
your amygdala would have grown bigger and been more reactive and been more likely to send a signal to pull the trigger
before you had the chance to say, "Wait a second, let's look a second time and see if that really is a handgun-
it's a cell phone." All of this from one second ago to how much stress hormones you were exposed to
when you were a fetus going into that moment as to whether or not you're gonna make
a totally tragic decision in a fraction of a second.
Judges and parole
- In thinking about that example, it's like, "Yes, okay. I'm in a threatening situation. It's pretty obvious that some of these sort
of environmental stimuli might impact my behaviors." I mean, we have reaction times as it relates to predators
and things of that from our evolutionary biology- like I get that. I can see how those other factors might impact the decision
that I'm making in that particular moment. But one of my favorite anecdotes from your book was actually about judges and parole
and how their decisions are also causal related to things that they're doing earlier in the day.
Do you mind talking about that example for me? - I love this study, and I should say it's become quite prominent.
I should also say a number of other researchers have challenged the results along statistical lines
and the authors have completely refuted those challenges and the basic finding has been replicated,
all of that, it's solid. So this was a study published in this very prestigious journal, looking at a bunch of parole board judges
and all the parole decisions they made over the course of the years, hundreds, looking at the simple question,
is there anything that predicted who they let go free and who they sent back to jail?
And it turned out that the single most powerful predictor was how many hours it had been
since the judge had eaten a meal. Appear before the judge right after they've just had a great lunch
and you had approximately 60% chance of getting parole, by a few hours later, you're down to 0% chance.
Oh my God, what's this about? What this is about is your brain is expensive.
It takes a huge amount of energy to run, and it's 3% of your body mass, it takes 25% of the energy
and if you got low blood glucose, your brain isn't gonna work as well, and especially the parts of the brain
like your frontal cortex that are saying, "Wait, wait, wait, don't just jump to a fast decision and send them back to jail.
Think about this guy's life. Think about his perspective in the world.
Think about, think a second time, a fifth time, do the harder thing," and it's easier for your brain
to instead say, "Just send 'em back to jail." And what's amazing to me is not only that we understand
some of this workings of it, but what's also amazing is you sit down one of those judges at that point and say,
"Whoa, that's really interesting. Remember right after lunch, you had this guy here who had done X and you paroled him
and just now this guy here who had done X also and you sent him back to jail, what's the difference here?"
The judge isn't gonna talk about his blood glucose levels, he's gonna talk about freshman philosophy class
or something and studies since then have extended it. If you wanna get a loan from a bank,
do not go and ask for one when the person hasn't eaten for hours. If you want somebody to spend more time
looking at your resume, if you're applying for a job, ask him to look at it right after lunch,
that yeah- that has something to do with it.
Yeah, that's part of what's going on and your brain is embedded in your body.
Your brain is embedded
- When I heard that anecdote, part of me thought about like, what do we do with this piece of information?
Like specifically from like, if people are performing important actions
and making important choices, where things like whether they ate a meal early enough
for their body to sort of like have sufficient energy for them to do sort of some of the higher level processing
that they need with complex decisions, it feels like that's an easy solve, like eat something.
- Yes, eat something. And I had the singularly interesting privilege
on a number of occasions to talk to groups of judges about exactly this and whoa,
they do not like hearing about this study. Yeah, that one's an easy fix, eat something.
What's not as easy of a fix is, "Whoa, you were exposed to a massive trauma 20 years ago,"
or "Oh, you were raised in poverty," or "Oh, your fetal brain was pickled in alcohol
because your mother-" for those, for the ones where it's way in the past there,
I think the easiest take home lesson is every time you're making a decision
about why somebody just did something, including yourself, stop and question it and think about it a second time
and a fifth time and a 10th time. And as part of that decision, because you can't imagine what the world is like
for that person as part of that decision, because their face doesn't register with yours
as much as an "us's" face does there, just be skeptical and think again and again,
and especially when you're tired and you just wanna make a fast attribution.
How do we prepare people
- One of the things this brings to mind for me is just like, how do we prepare people as a society?
I think in this context, I think about it in terms of education, and I actually think about it
in terms of America's founding fathers. Thomas Jefferson wrote a whole book on education and how it was important for society
to educate future generations. And they were thinking about it as a civic sense and like what our civic duty is.
But I think about these sorts of conditions, how do we train people to stop and reflect?
How do we get them to be the type of person where that is the likely course of action that they are going to take?
I think about what we're talking about here in those terms as well. So I'm curious, how do we create the conditions
that make it possible for the likely action that a person is going to take is when they're going into a situation
where they might be stressed out or they might make a decision that could be harmful to some other person that they stop and reflect
and realize all the distributed causality that might be causing them to take a certain action
or be prone to a certain action at a certain point in time? - Fantastic question because part of the ability
to question and think a second time and a fifth and a 10th is did you wind up being the sort of person
who could do that, who could do that well? Are you so invested emotionally
that you're unwilling to change your opinion? Are you like perverse enough that you wanna come up with the opposite of it?
Yeah, how'd that happen? The key thing here is, one of the things that people panic about
when you say, "Oh, there's no free will." I mean, they say, "Oh my God, don't tell people that they'll run amok and there'll be murderers on the streets."
And in addition, if there's no free will, if everything was determined, nothing can change.
And you couldn't possibly be more wrong than that; enormous change happens.
And the key thing is we do not choose to change,
we are changed by circumstances. And we are changed by those circumstances
as a function of who we had been made into at the moment we experience it.
Look, you got two people, they go in to watch a movie. It's totally inspirational, it's great. And one person comes out of the movie changed, changed.
They make different decisions in their life. They say, "Oh my God, that was so inspirational. I'm immediately gonna give my life savings away
to Doctors Without Borders." And the other person comes out changed,
changed so that they make different decisions in life. And they say, "Oh my God, the cinematography was so amazing in that movie.
I'm gonna spend the rest of my life at the feet of the cinematographer worshiping them." Whoa, they were both changed.
Neither of them chose to change. They were changed by experience. And they were changed as a function
of who they had turned out to be at the moment they went into that movie theater.
So that's exactly where we get sort of prescriptions.
Not only are we biological machines like worms and redwood trees and crabgrass and stuff,
but we're the only biological machines that can know that we're biological machines and have some insights as to where the buttons are
and where the levers are and to understand what makes certain types of changes
more readily happening than others. And there's a whole world of changes you could bring about
in people to make them's, for example, seem so different they hardly count as humans.
Every single dictator out there, every ideologue, every genocidal, whoever intuitively knows
how to bring about those changes in people. Yeah, we know how to change behavior
and we get more insights into it all the time. And another way of framing that is we learn more
about the levers and the buttons. And one of the most interesting things that come out of it
is we have this meta-level of you were changed by experience
and say, "Whoa, I'm totally moved by that movie and I never knew about that historical tragedy before.
I'm going to go read some more books about it. I'm going to go reinforce that."
We're capable of observing the change in us and understanding what will make it
less likely or more likely. "Oh my God, that was the most depressing movie on Earth. I'm going to now counteract that
by go listening to K-pop for the next 12 hours so that my mind is completely drained of it."
Yeah, we even understand what our levers are within us.
And if we've been trained to respect that process and reflect on it, then that whole thing.
Yep, it's these recursive loops built around the fact that we can know our machine-ness.
Artificial intelligence and free will
- I wasn't planning to talk about artificial intelligence today but you called us a biological machine,
and I think it's kind of interesting and "recursive loop" is a term that you use which is one of the things that
as people have been experimenting with things like large language models that they've been talking about the ability
for them to teach themselves and to learn. I wonder if in some sense that some of the confusion
that we've had around this idea of free will is in part because we've never met another intelligence
that can also spit back to us in terms that we're familiar with that speaks the same language as us.
I wonder if you have any thoughts about the relationship between the machine intelligence
that we're starting to interact with even though it's at levels that are far lower than what we consider human intelligence per se,
and how that is going to interact or potentially shift some of our notions around free will
because those things aren't self-directed yet. They're programs, they're input, output
but in some sense, they're spitting back to us things that feel intentional and we're imbuing them
with these sort of anthropomorphized values. So I'm curious if you think that's going to change or tip the way in which people think
about things like free will. - Well, for starters, I have to admit that I am beyond ignorant about all of this.
I don't even know enough to be wrong about AI. Like I'm up to being able to handle a mouse on a computer.
That's about what century I'm functioning in and that's thanks to my wife teaching me how to use a mouse.
So all of those caveats, I think these issues are absolutely going to come up and they're gonna bring up a really interesting,
fascinating, seductive domain that actually has nothing to do with free will;
which is the notion that at some point these computers are gonna be so powerful with enough component parts
that stuff is going to emerge that's so complex
that it could only be described on the level of what has emerged. And it's got a parallel-
which is we throw enough neurons into our brains- our basic neuron is not all that different
than one in a fruit fly, but we have a hundred million for every one that a fruit fly does, and throw enough of them together and more is different;
and outcome stuff like consciousness and theology
and music and aesthetics and all of that emergent stuff comes out
that only has properties at that emergent level. A molecule of water, H2O, cannot feel wet.
Wetness is an emergent property of a whole. So that's like the most interesting stuff on Earth,
and emergence how your brain wires up most efficiently and it's the same way that ants expend their least energy foraging
and it's the coolest stuff and I love that stuff. But then there's the seductive like quicksand
to decide that free will is an emergent property.
And the reason why that doesn't work is every model you have out there of people saying,
"Oh, you throw enough neurons in there or whatever it is you throw in to make a computer AI-ish,"
you throw enough stuff in there and with enough quantity, you invent quality and out will pop not only consciousness,
maybe AI is going to do that and it does in us, but maybe free will as well.
And the problem is that every single model of how an emergently complex system
can now generate free will requires that emergent level to be able to reach down
to those little simple component parts and make them work differently and make them work smarter.
And that's like saying, you put enough ants together and not only can they construct this whole amazing
ant society and colony and architectural stuff in their passageways,
but they also like suddenly are able to speak French- and it doesn't work that way.
And the whole point, the amazing thing about emergentness, you start with some stupidly simple thing
like a neuron or a ant or a whatever the hell computers
are made of, a vacuum tube or something- and the whole point is each individual one is really simple
and has a very finite number of rules. And often the rules are solely about how you interact
with the elements immediately around you. And the amazing thing about emergence is they're just as stupid and simple
when they're inventing things like philosophy coming out the other end, that's the whole point of it.
Every model that says free will is an emergent property requires the ants and the individual neurons
to suddenly do stuff that they can't do, to be freed from their own histories.
So emergence is the coolest thing on Earth and I torture my students with hours of lectures on that,
but that's not where you're gonna get free will from. - Emergence is one of those things that I struggle to understand too.
Emergence
And even when you say you can only describe the property at the emergent level,
from a metaphysical sense, I'm not even sure what that is. And the wetness example is instructive.
I get that intuitively, the interrelation between the different molecules that make up H2O
and how they interact and produce wetness as an emergent property. But when it relates to something like consciousness,
and this is probably just the mystery of consciousness at this particular moment, I'm lost at where this emergence sort of sits.
Could you help me sort of understand that? Like where is emergence as a property
sort of within this material world that we inhabit? - Well, the way to think about it
is it's simply a consequence of numbers. You take one ant and you put it on a table
and it's just wandering around randomly and it makes no sense. And you do 10 ants there and it's kind of the same.
And you put a hundred ants and I don't know, maybe they start marching at a line or something. And you put 10,000 of them there
and suddenly, collectively, in a "wisdom of Antdom," they know how to build a whole colony
with like different jobs. And like they know how to make slaves out of aphids
and milk them for that. And they do all this incredible- and it's simply properties that come out of that level.
An emergent property in us, where in the brain is conformity?
If you were raised in a box and you spend your whole life in a box, conformity is never an issue for you.
Conformity is only something that emerges when you're surrounded by other people
and you care about what they think of you. And that's like, there's a nuts and bolts
that makes some people more conforming than others, and why we're more conforming when we're stressed or feel insecure.
There's like the nuts and bolts underneath the levers, the buttons, the building blocks are churning away
explaining how conformity varies from one person to another. But the most important thing is
you can't be a human living alone on a desert island and conform or not to conform
to something about human behavior. Conformity or being an anarchist
or being like a fan of Mozart or anything are only traits that emerge
when you have other humans to interact with. So that's a classic case.
The frontal cortex
- With distributed causality, we sort of talked about the short-term effects, the things that can be happening at the minute,
the second, the hour-length of time that would impact or influence human actions
or behaviors or decisions that someone is going to execute at a particular moment in time.
And we've even talked about things like child rearing, what is the sort of things that are going to impact a person's decision later in life
because of the context of how they were raised. But I'm thinking about broadening the lens even more: What are some of the things from genetics,
from epigenetics, from our evolutionary history that ladder up into these distributed causes
that influence human behavior, human actions and human decisions when they are interacting with other humans
or society writ large? - Here's like a great example of it- back to the frontal cortex.
Its evolution is really interesting. It's the most recently evolved part of the primate brain.
We've got more of it or more complicated wiring than any other primate;
it's like totally amazing. Yeah, there's been this evolution of an increased capacity for self-regulation
and impulse control and making the right decisions, all of that. Evolution has given us an additional interesting thing
with the frontal cortex. Most of your brain is wired up and going about its business by the time
you're three years old, five years old. Some new stuff comes online when puberty upends everything,
but your frontal cortex is not fully mature until you're about 25 years old.
It's the last part of the brain to mature. What have we just explained?
We've explained why adolescents act in adolescent ways, and why like 15 year olds are not putting away
their allowance for their retirement funds. But then you ask sort of a mechanistic question: Why does it take 25 years for this part of the cortex
to get wired up? Whereas say this part of this part is in the first few years of life. Is it because it's a more complicated building project?
Are there neurotransmitters that are only found in the frontal? Nah, it's the same exact constituent parts.
It's not a more complicated building project. What it is is we have evolved to have delayed maturation
of the frontal cortex. Why is that? Because if the frontal cortex's job is going to be
to make you to do the harder thing when it's the right thing to do, it's really challenging learning
what counts as the right thing. You gotta learn your society's hypocrisies.
You've gotta learn your society's rationales and lies, and "Thou shall not kill."
But if you kill one of them, we're gonna give you a medal and vote for you and maybe like preferentially mate with you.
It takes a long time to learn this stuff. And we have a longer delayed frontal cortical maturation
than any other primate and it's minuscule in rodent. And this is a recent evolutionary invention.
Let's frame it this way: Your frontal cortex has evolved.
The genes that specify your frontal cortex have evolved to make you as free from genes as possible.
Your frontal cortex is the part of your brain that is the freest from genetic influences
because it's still being sculpted by environment and experience a quarter century after you plopped out there
whereas most of the rest of your brain is sculpted by two or three years worth of experience.
Whoa, we evolved, our genes evolved to free our frontal cortex from strict genetic determinism
and to make it much more sculpted by environmental determinism. Totally cool because one culture
has a completely different set of moral compass rules than another culture, and they're hard to learn
and they can't be coded for genetically. You gotta spend a whole lot of time learning what counts as the right thing
among the people with whom you're dwelling. - That's absolutely fascinating.
I mean, one of the other favorite anecdotes from your book, I believe, was talking about mothers
from different parts of the world and the ways in which they sing to their child,
how long they hold their child, how long they let their child cry before picking them up and the different impacts that could have
on the neural patterns on their brain. I'm curious if you could sort of like talk about that
a little bit more 'cause I find it absolutely fascinating that even those sorts of things can have impacts on how your brain develops.
- It's immensely interesting stuff. Okay, when you study cross-cultural differences
and psyches and all sorts of things like that, the classic comparison everybody gets around to
is studying collectivist cultures versus individualist cultures.
Collectivist cultures, people are far more cooperative. You do psychological tests,
and they think in terms of "we" instead of "me." There's all like wonderful ways of demonstrating.
Where are the collectivist cultures on Earth most prominent? Southeast Asia, rice-growing regions,
where you and the whole village have to plant this person's crop today.
And then all of you collectively plant the next person's tomorrow and the next person after that,
and you all harvest in one day. And you're also cooperating collectively with 50 other villages to maintain this irrigation system
that starts in the mountains 100 miles away and that you've been collectively maintaining for centuries and centuries, literally.
Individualist world: The U.S., poster child for individualistic mindset,
because we're mostly peopled by dependent descendants of malcontents and individualistic-like troublemakers
who fled wherever they were to come here. The U.S. is incredibly individualistic.
Ask like an American, "Tell me about yourself," And they'll say, "Well, I'm a urban planner or a barista."
Take somebody from Southeast Asia and on the average, you ask them, tell me about yourself, and they will say, "Well, I'm a parent, I'm a child."
It's relational stuff like that. Okay, so hooray, different sorts of cultures.
And you look and there's different sorts of mothering styles. And as you mentioned there,
collectivist culture mothers on the average sing more quietly to their child
than individualist cultures mothers. There's differences, you start crying,
you're an infant, you start crying- on the average, how many seconds do you cry before mom picks you up?
In collectivist cultures, mom picks you up earlier. In individualist ones, it's a longer delay
because they're toughening you up. When do you start sleeping alone? How much physical contact?
All of that, like you show like classic sort of cultural linguistic child training and stuff.
If you show a kid a picture of there's a whole bunch of fish here and there's a fish here in the front-
and this is a colleague of mine who did wonderful research on this- and you get somebody from an individualist culture
showing this to their child. And the mother is saying, "look, look at this fish,
this leader, this is the fish that's the leader of all these other fish." And then you get somebody from a collectivist culture
who's of that mindset. And the mother is saying, "Oh, look at this fish, this poor fish, he's all alone.
He can't be with the rest of the group. He must've done something very wrong where everybody else doesn't want him to be."
Like completely different mindsets with that. And you get contrasts- were your ancestors,
desert dwellers or rainforest dwellers? If they were desert dwellers, they're significantly more likely
to have invented a monotheistic religion. Rainforest, polytheistic.
If your ancestors were pastoralists wandering the grasslands with their cows
or camels or goats or whatever, they're much more likely to have come up with what's called a "culture of honor."
If somebody transgresses against you, you transgress twice as bad back at them
because if you don't, they just stole your camel, tomorrow, they're gonna come and steal the rest of your camel and your wife and daughters.
But if you're a rainforest forager, you don't invent a culture of honor.
All this stuff goes into it. And the job of every generation's child-rearing practices
is to create a child whose brain has been constructed to replicate the cultural values that you have
and thus passed on and passed on. Okay, fabulous example of this.
Southeast China, rice-growing, flat floodplains; you get this extremely collectivist mindset.
There's a small pocket of Northern China mountainous where people instead do wheat growing
and it's very individualistic in how it's done. And you get people there who are just as individualistic
as somebody living on the Upper West Side of Manhattan or whatever.
And here's an experiment showing, not in the farmers, their grandkids who were university students-
this was this totally cool study- you go to a Starbucks there, and the researchers did an experiment.
There's two tables here and they moved two chairs so that they're back to back. They're blocking the way between the tables.
And here comes your subject who's being observed and what do they do?
And if it turns out, if you were raised in the collectivist Southeast Asia rice-growing
floodplain culture, you're more likely than average to walk around the table.
And if you come from the individualistic, wheat-growing ends, you pull the chairs apart
because you are the captain of your own fate. And whoa, this is because your grandparents
either like planted seeds with 400 members of the village at once, or they looked out on the horizon
and like thought of like heroic, like cowboy movie soundtracks before doing it all on their own.
This makes you act differently two generations later in a Starbucks just outside your university in China.
Whoa, that stuff matters as well. - You know, that was fascinating.
Social anthropology
I just wanna double-click on one thing you just mentioned: You talked about child rearing as it relates to society and I was curious to get a sense of,
do you think that the evolutionary role of society is to ensure that the culture survives
into the next generation? - You know, there's this great aphorism
in like evolutionary theory that sometimes a chicken is just an egg's way
of making another egg. If I were much more monomaniacal of a neurobiologist
and were put in charge of the world, I would say that social anthropology
is the study of how you wire up a brain like your parents' brains.
Yeah, that's like crazy, stupid, reductive, but on a certain, yeah, to pass on your values,
to pass on your beliefs, to pass on what you love, what you hate, who you would kill for,
who you would die for, what myths you have of heroism, what's gonna happen to you after you die,
whether revenge or turn the other cheek- and all of that gets taught to us at a very early age,
and reflects what our ancestors invented, and how mom and grandmom, etc., were raised-
and all of it reflects how you constructed the brain. And not in this, as you say,
this volitional conscious sense, but it's just the wind tunnel that plays one of the big roles
in sculpting the sort of brain you're gonna have. - You know, I certainly plan things all the time.
If I wanna lose weight and I wanna eat better, that's a thing that I just do as a human.
I feel some agency and some steerability of those decisions that I have.
And it's not that you've lost those things, but you can better understand what those things are.
How would you explain to people that even though there is no free will,
there's still steerability in the system to some extent. Like how would you help people parse those differences?
- Well, that's that whole example of going into a movie theater, and you are changed by it
as a function of who you are when you went in, and you have the potential as a meta-thinking human
to be able to then reinforce that pathway with a recursive loop, all of that.
Let's translate that into you. Let's unpack you. How do you turn out to be the sort of person
who knows what constitutes a healthy diet? How do you be the sort of person
where your values include wanting to forego an all-Cheetos diet
instead to wanna be able to be healthy? How did you turn out to be the sort of person
with a frontal cortex that could make you actually stick with that resolution? How did you turn out to be someone where you lucked out
and you live in a neighborhood where there's actually like fresh food that's available?
How did all of those contributed to that moment? And I think what that translates into,
sort of most effectively for what people should think about, is if you really believe this stuff
and take it to its logical conclusions- where nothing more than the biology and environment over which we had no control-
if you really believe that, blame and punishment never make any sense
either, intellectually or ethically. Likewise, praise and reward never make any sense.
And those are the logical conclusions that come from this. That being said, like I've thought this way since I was 14,
and I can actually function this way for about three and a half minutes every month or so
'cause it's really, really hard. And what you gotta do, I think, is do the,
"Okay, how did they become who they are? And what privileges did I have that I didn't earn
that had something to do with how I turned out to be who I am?" And go back and think through that a second time,
a fifth time, the tenth time, when it's a setting that really matters, when you're about to judge somebody strongly
because almost certainly if you think you know why they did what they just did, you're gonna be wrong
because you're not thinking of a million distributed causes. And virtually every time you decide,
"Well, I just did a good job, I deserve my corner office, I deserve to be CEO,
I deserve to have running water and electricity," any version of you winding up being one of the lucky humans,
think about how you wound up this way, and how by one little thread being different
could have been a totally different story. So if it's gonna be hard, and it's incredibly hard for me,
and I think for anyone, if it's gonna be, save it for when it really matters, for when you're really judging
with a whole lot of sense of blame or you're judging with a whole lot of sense of praise,
especially if it's for yourself or people who are like you, who look like you and pray like you and eat like you
and love like you and all that. Yeah, those are the times when do the hard work,
go back and remember all we are is the end product of what came before.
What to do about sticky situations
- You know, I know you've done a lot of work in the legal system, within the criminal justice system:
what should we do about those sticky situations where it's, you know, people are behaving
in ways that are harmful to others and there needs to be some consequences
to help to prevent them from harming other people. If it's not blame or punishment,
what is the way of looking at those sorts of things? - Yeah, this is the juncture where people
like burn a book like mine and saying, "Oh great, you're just gonna have murderers
running around the streets!" Of course, you're not gonna have murderers running around in the streets any more than you have cars whose brakes don't work
out on the streets. You put the car in a garage, but you don't go in every day with a sledgehammer
and smash the car over the top because it has a crappy soul- it just turned out that way.
And in the same way, if you've got someone who's dangerous, you gotta protect society from them. You constrain them, you "quarantine" them,
which is a word that is getting a lot of currency in sort of criminology circles. And with the same concept borrowed from public health,
you have to quarantine the person because they are dangerous to other people.
You quarantine them the absolute minimum needed to make them safe and not an inch more than that.
You don't preach to them in the process and you put lots of effort into understanding root causes.
How did they wind up being a dangerous person like that? What can you do to make fewer of those sorts of people
in the future? And this seems like totally wild and implausible
because there's dangerous people out there. Here's a sample of us using quarantine models with dangerous people:
You're an airline pilot. It's hay fever season and you're taking a lot of antihistamines or something.
And as a result, you're drowsy and you don't fly a plane at that time.
Whoa, we don't like burn them at the stake. We don't say they've got a terrible upbringing
or no capacity for empathy because if left alone, they would crash a plane. We say, gotta quarantine you
when you're taking something that makes you drowsy. You can still go and like go get a coffee at Starbucks,
which is clearly on my mind right now. We're not gonna preach to you about how you're rotten.
And we, the airline, go fund research on how to make antihistamines
that don't make pilots drowsy. Whoa, we're running society
where we have drowsy pilots who would be dangerous and we protect people without invoking a sense of responsibility.
And that's so obvious, it doesn't even occur to us that that's a realm where we've subtracted free will out of it.
The flip side is praise and reward make no sense. Meritocracies are as insupportable
as criminal justice systems. But you got a problem there. You gotta protect people from incompetent people
doing stuff that's difficult. If you got a brain tumor, you really don't want them to pick someone randomly
from off the street to take out your brain. You want them to spend years and years being trained.
You wanna protect people from murderers by quarantining them. And you wanna protect the populace
from people who are not up to doing difficult tasks. And that requires skill and work and motivation
and all of that. That one's a tough problem because you have to figure out how to motivate someone to like sit there on Saturday night
when their roommate is going and getting falling down drunk and they say, "I gotta study instead."
You gotta figure out how you're gonna motivate people if you're not gonna have a world where they come out the other end feeling entitled
and feeling like they are intrinsically a better human than others.
- Robert, thank you so much for this discussion. This has been really illuminating, and I'm really grateful to talk with you
about free will, determinism and just the constraints that exist within all of our behaviors and actions
that we take as people. - Well, thanks for having me on. It's a pleasure.
Want to dive deeper? Become a Big Think member and join our members-only community, watch videos early, and unlock full interviews.


- Physicists have a long history
of sticking our noses where they don't belong,
and one of our favorite places to step beyond our expertise
is the question of consciousness and free will.
Sometimes our musings are insightful, sometimes incoherent,
and usually at least somewhat naive,
which is a fair description of this show.
So of course, "Space Time" needs to weigh in
on the subject of physics and free will.
(light music)
In recent episodes, we explored the notion of determinism
in the context of the block universe idea
that we get from Einstein's relativity.
In it, the past and future
have a sort of eternal timeless existence
from the point of view of some god-like observer
outside both space and time.
And this naturally brings into focus
the question of how physics relates
to the concept of free will.
The most evocative expression of perfect determinism
is given by Laplace's demon.
In 1814, Pierre Simon Laplace postulated
that a sufficiently vast intellect
that had perfect knowledge of the current state
of the universe, like the positions and velocities
of all particles,
and perfect knowledge of the laws of nature
could calculate perfectly all future states of the universe.
If you accept that the mind is generated by the brain,
which is made of matter,
and you've already accepted that matter follows
the cold inviolable laws of nature,
then your mind, every single thought, choice, decision,
is the inevitable result of the long chain
of cause and effect that came before it.
And what you do next also is already determined.
Laplace's demon knows whether or not you'll decide
you believe in free will.
There are many ways of looking at the concept in question
of free will.
We are not gonna pretend to give any definitive answers
regarding its reality,
but we do wanna look at the most popular way
this question is positioned in physics,
the idea that determinism negates free will.
Is it really that simple?
One note before I go further.
Yes, we will mention the quantum,
but importantly, that is not to say
that free will or consciousness
are necessarily related to it.
We'll talk about that connection
or lack thereof another time.
But understanding the implications of quantum mechanics
is key to unraveling determinism
and its connection to predictability.
Quantum mechanics seems to tell us
that one of the following is true.
Either the outcomes of quantum-scale events
are fundamentally random
or the outcomes of quantum events are perfectly determined
by quantum laws and the apparent randomness comes
from our limited perspective.
Let's unpack these possibilities and what they imply
for free will by looking at it in terms of information.
One of the most important rules of quantum mechanics
is the principle of conservation of quantum information.
It just says that quantum information
can never be destroyed or created out of nothing.
We've talked about why
this is such a fundamental law previously.
Let's paint a cartoon representation of quantum information
in a block universe.
Two dimensions of space and one of time,
the slices of the block universe represent
the causal ordering of the universe.
Lower layers cause layers above them.
Each bit of quantum information
can be represented as a thread.
Threads are evolving quantum states.
These may transform and become entangled with each other,
but if quantum information is conserved,
a thread can never vanish
nor start out of nothing.
We'll ignore what happens
at the beginning of time for today.
Tangled networks of these threads may spend time
as different types of matter
and sometimes as brains,
both as the crude matter that forms the brain
and the ephemeral configuration of neural connections,
synaptic strengths, and electrochemical dynamics
from which we think emerges our experience of our minds.
So, information goes in as the stuff of the brain
and the experience of our senses,
and information comes out,
sometimes in the form of the choices we make.
The brain is like a machine
for processing information into choices.
We can parcel that decision-making machine off
from the rest of the universe,
and we can ask, what has to happen inside this patch
for us to reasonably attribute free will to it?
There are different ways we could define free will
in this picture.
We could require that information emerging from the brain
in the form of a decision,
either one, incorporates an entirely new thread
of quantum information,
in violation with the conservation principle,
or two, that this information just not be predictable
even in principle by any arbitrarily precise
far future brain scanning technology.
And there are other requirements we could place,
like three, that the future not be predefined
and not singular,
or four, we could require that the choice
not depend on any underlying non-free-willed,
mechanistic process, whether that process
is deterministic or random.
I'm going to argue that it's reasonable
to endow the brain with free will
with some combination of the first three.
If we demand number four,
that there's no underlying non-free-willed mechanics
to the process of choice,
then free will probably is indeed dead.
But I'll also argue that this is an unreasonable ask.
Let's start with one and two.
You are free-willed if you
or fundamentally unpredictable information
can emerge from your brain's patch of space time.
Now, creating brand new information explicitly violates
conservation of quantum information.
That said, the most mainstream interpretation
of quantum mechanics has the same problem.
The Copenhagen interpretation insists
that the apparent randomness of quantum events
is really random.
The quantum information in the state of the wave function
before collapse is destroyed,
but information is also created.
The outcome of quantum interactions are chosen
in fundamentally unpredictable ways.
Information threads both end and begin
at every wave function collapse.
The idea of random processes driving our choices
doesn't really sound like free will,
so is there any possible way to generate new information
that isn't random, that's somehow intentional?
Well, actually, not really.
Think about a new thread of quantum information starting
from nothing, let's say emerging from a packet of space time
where no information enters.
By definition, it has no cause.
But the notion of choice implies a deliberate cause
to that bit of information being intentionally, say,
a one or a zero rather than randomly a one or a zero.
But that cause is by definition a thread
of ingoing information.
If the cause arises within our packet, within our brain,
then either it itself is random
or has its own causing thread whose origin
is either in our brain and uncaused, random,
or has an origin outside our brain,
meaning our brain didn't choose.
You could say that the cause arises outside the universe
in a supernatural sense,
but then all we need to do is expand our definition
of the universe to all things causally connected
and we reach the same conclusion.
The only way for new information to come
from a closed region is for it to be generated randomly
within that region.
On the surface, the idea of randomly generating
new streams of quantum information within a brain
doesn't seem to help the cause of free will.
I'll argue shortly that there's a notion of free will
in which it doesn't matter the origin
of the unpredictability of choice.
But let's first look at another source
of that unpredictability.
Even in a deterministic universe,
Laplace's demon is a fiction.
It's not just impossible in practice
to perfectly measure all the states of a brain,
of neurons, their activity, the molecules involved
and their signaling, et cetera.
It's also impossible in principle.
By that I mean, there's a fundamental limit
to the amount of information that can be collected
about a system.
Forget the brain, that's true even for a box full
or air molecules.
This is a direct consequence
of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle,
which tells us that measuring one property perfectly
leaves a counterpart property perfectly undefined.
So, there is no possibility to perfectly know the state
of the brain or of the information threads
that go into making it,
either in principle or in practice,
because unknown random processes are at work,
and/or perfect measurement is not possible
for any entity that could possibly exist.
But is the impossibility of perfect predictability enough
to endow us with free will?
What if some future type of brain scan
allows 98% predictability of your choices?
This is actually a very interesting area of research,
which we may talk about another time,
but the short story is that even for the simplest decision,
the best people have done is to predict
just a bit above chance
at 60 to 70% accuracy and retrospectively.
Which means, you could ask if it's even prediction
or really just finding a correlation
between a brain state and an outcome a few seconds later.
And don't quote the famous Libet experiment at me.
It's been thoroughly cast in a new light.
The short answer is we don't know how well
we'll ever be able to forward model a brain's behavior,
even with the best future technology.
By the way, there's also evidence to indicate
that brain activity utilizes the random fluctuations
of neuronal activity to make certain decisions.
In other words, a certain type of randomness
may be a feature of the brain,
an item in its mechanistic toolbox.
So even the all-knowing Laplace demon
may be out of luck, especially if quantum randomness
or quantum indeterminacy is magnified
to brain-level activity.
Again, not saying consciousness is quantum.
We'll talk more about that soon.
Another important consideration
is whether or not the future is actually singular
and determined, regardless of the existence
of any agents of choice.
In the Copenhagen interpretation,
the future is singular but undetermined.
One future will happen,
but it's impossible to predict what it will be.
In the many worlds interpretation,
the future is plural and determined.
All possible futures exist
and develop according to the laws of quantum mechanics.
In either case, there's a place for a fair notion
of free will.
Either our brains play a part choosing
what future happens or the choices we experience
are the process of choosing which many worlds future
we travel towards,
even if other versions of us choose otherwise.
The case where free will may really struggle
is the case of a singular determined future.
You can get this sort of singular hard determinism
with things like DeBroglie-Bohm pilot-wave theory.
But fortunately for free will,
such interpretations don't look like they're correct,
at least as they currently stand.
Let's talk about the fourth argument against free will
in my earlier list,
that a purely mechanistic process can't lead
to any reasonable notion of free will.
So we've established that there are plausible ways
in which fundamental unpredictable information,
perhaps in the form of choices, can emerge from a brain.
So this nexus of quantum information processing
may truly be an unpredictable black box
decision-making machine, at least some of the time.
Add to that the fact that its emergent phenomenon,
conscious free will, can recursively influence
the machine itself.
The brain can talk itself into new states.
Could that be enough to designate it free-willed?
Some would argue no.
If there's a mechanistic substrate
to generating this phenomenon,
which is founded in either deterministic
or random processes,
then the phenomenon is an illusion.
But I think it's a reductionist fallacy
to deny an emergent phenomenon any properties
not also possessed by its parts.
A red apple is made of atoms,
but atoms possess neither redness nor appleness.
Yet, we don't say that apples are an illusion.
If it's not even in principle possible
to perfectly predict a brain's choices,
and that brain feels like it's making choices,
is it reasonable to deny meaningfulness
to the concept of free will
just because the brain's atoms don't have free will?
The same goes with your conscious experience.
It's not an illusion.
It's an emergent phenomenon,
and it's the most directly verifiably real thing
you will ever observe.
You don't choose the mechanical behavior
of your brain's atoms or the electrical potential
that triggers each firing neuron.
Those things are the substrate of your choices,
and your choices are you.
In the end, this is all semantic.
There are definitions of free will
that we probably don't have,
but both physics and neuroscience tell us
that we can probably call ourselves free-willed
by a number of very reasonable and functional definitions.
Ultimately, many agree that the question
is just badly posed.
When you ask, is free will an illusion,
what do you mean by free or will or illusion
or is, for that matter?
Well, you go ahead and enjoy the very convincing illusion
that you are going to go down a recursive rabbit hole
deciding whether you have the free will to decide
if free will exists.
I'm now gonna exercise my free will
to not end this episode with me saying, "Space Time."
(mysterious music continues)
(intense music)


The history of philosophy has been dominated by competing arguments around the ideas of
Free Will and Determinism. Simply stated, the issue hangs on whether human beings should
be thought of as fundamentally free to choose their actions and mould their lives – or
whether they should be deemed as being at heart determined by forces beyond their control,
be they fate, biology, politics or class. The debate has been long-running and hugely
vicious. It began in Ancient Greece, was picked up by the Romans, dominated Christian philosophy
and rumbles on to this day among philosophers, psychologists and neuroscientists. Part of
the reason why the question seems so hard to find a conclusive answer to is that it
is almost always framed in objective terms, as if we might discover whether either Free
Will or Determinism could be an advisable interpretation for human beings in general.
But, in truth, the debate becomes more interesting and more relevant if we change the parameters
of the question – and ask simply: is an idea of Free Will or of Determinism more or
less relevant to me? All of us will have different needs in this area depending on our contrasting
levels of two psychological qualities: Defeatism on the one hand, Aspiration on the other.
There are people whose levels of Defeatism have grown so high, they too readily declare
that responsibility for things always lies outside of themselves: the course of their
life is, they tell us, entirely determined by parents, school, the government, the bosses,
the media… anyone but themselves. The result is radical under-achievement and self-deceit.
But there is another kind of difficulty created in people whose levels of Aspiration have
grown so high on the basis of overly exaggerated notions of Free Will. They will deem that
everything about their lives is capable of change. They will declare that they can achieve
all things simply through an exercise of the will. Their career and income, their relationships
and prospects are all, apparently, subject to dramatic change. It’s an inspiring philosophy,
but one that reliably also leads – when things don’t work out, as they never do
in all areas – to bitterness and rage. Each of us needs to decide for ourselves whether
we should have a greater faith in Determinism or in Free Will. We should ask how much of
the suffering in our lives can be traced back to a defeatist attitude and how much might
be traced back to reckless aspiration. Some of us need to dial up a faith in Free Will,
others need more of a mellow acceptance of Determinism. The oldest debate in philosophy
isn’t beyond answering. We just have to answer it more personally, with more of a
sense of what we need to believe in to be calmer and more fulfilled. Perhaps the wisest
way to navigate the debate between Free Will and Determinism was worked out by the Ancient
Roman philosophers of the Stoic school. These Stoics proposed that we should see ourselves
as always hovering between a Free and a Determined state – and they invented a powerful image
to evoke our condition as creatures able at times to effect great change – and yet never
far from being subject to immensely powerful external necessities. We are, they said, like
dogs who have been tied to an unpredictable cart. Our leash is long enough to give us
a degree of leeway, but is not long enough ever just to allow us to wander wherever we
please. A dog will naturally hope to go wherever it pleases, said the Stoics. But if it cannot,
then it is better for the animal to be trotting behind the cart rather than dragged and strangled
by it. To reflect that we too are never without a leash around our neck may help to reduce
the violence of our protest against events which veer away from our intentions. It may
sound like a recipe for passivity, but as the Stoics insisted, it is no less unreasonable
to accept something as necessary when it isn’t as to rebel against something when it is.
It’s our reason that must judge the difference and this is where we have a big advantage
over a dog. A dog will probably not at first grasp that he is even tied to a cart, nor
understand the connection between the swerves of the cart and the pain in his neck. So he
won’t be able to predict where the cart is going and adjust his position accordingly.
But reason enables us to theorise with considerable accuracy about the path of the cart or destiny,
which offers us a chance, unique among living beings, to increase our sense of freedom by
ensuring a good slack between our desires and what we cannot change. Reason allows us
to calculate when our wishes are in irrevocable conflict with reality, and then bids us to
submit ourselves willingly, rather than angrily or bitterly, to necessities. We may be powerless
to alter certain events, but we remain free to choose our attitude towards them, and it
is in an unprotesting acceptance of what is truly necessary that we can find a distinctive serenity and freedom.
At The School of Life we believe in developing emotional intelligence.
To that end we've also created a whole range of products to support that growth. Find out
more at the link on the screen now.


hey guys it's Cosmic skeptic and I'm
sure that many of you are like me
currently feeling pretty down and upset
about being quarantined and unable to
leave the house and meet friends
thinking back to a time when you were
free and able to live your life as you
pleased without constraints so I thought
I'd take a moment to dispel this notion
by reminding you that you were never in
fact free in the first place that Free
Will does not exist and that the
constraints placed upon your freedom by
the coronavirus pale in comparison to
the constraints placed upon it by your
own brain you know come to think of it
that probably doesn't help at all still
if you haven't already seen it I made a
video a few years back explaining why I
believe that Free Will does not exist
now it's a bit of a weird claim I know
and if you're interested you can watch
it by clicking the little information
thingy that I've hopefully remembered to
put just here but since then I've heard
a lot of people claiming that a
philosophy called compatibilism is the
answer to the questions that I raised in
that original video all those years ago
and I thought that I'd just take some
time to discuss why I think it certainly
is not it's a bit of a complicated one
but bear with me so the existence of
Free Will is surprise surprise a
question that philosophers have been
debating since before records began and
the main problem appears to be a
contradiction between two thoughts first
there are really good compelling
arguments in favor of all of our actions
ultimately being determined by
determined I mean that if we were to
rewind the universe to the same
conditions it was in a million years ago
and press play every event would happen
in in exactly the same way including the
actions of human beings man would still
land on the moon in 1969 Barack Obama
would still be elected president in 2008
and you would once again be sat watching
this video whenever it is that you're
currently doing so this determinism is
largely a product of the rise of the
scientific method and the belief that
the Universe operates in accordance with
laws of cause and effect that every
event in the universe has some
sufficient explanation for why it
happened that is some preceding cause
that necessitated it if everything in
the universe is determined by laws in
this way then so is every event that
happens in your brain right so that's on
the one hand that's what's called
determinism but on the other hand is
this undeniably strong intuition that we
are truly free that multiple courses of
action are available to us at any time
and that we're capable of having acted
differently in any given situation that
is if we rewound the Universe I could
have worn a different color shirt or
made a video about a different topic the
fact that I'm doing this right now and
wearing this shirt was not determined by
the laws of the universe right now even
the most fervent determinist can't deny
the strength of the feeling that Free
Will exists that our actions aren't
determined by the universe in this way
but by our own volition instead it's a
very difficult intuition to let go of so
this clash between determinism and Free
Will leads to the problem how do we
Square these well some do so simply by
denying either determinism or free will
okay so some people deny that
determinism is true and say that Human
Action is free perhaps through some
method of causation that we don't fully
understand others including myself do
the opposite affirming determinism and
denying that Free Will exists now
strictly speaking I'm not a determinist
because I think that some things in the
universe might be random but random
events are also out of my control by
definition so I would still deny that
Free Will exists but there is one other
Brave and in my view entirely misguided
group called The compatibilists as the
name suggests the compatibilist believes
that Free Will exists and that
determinism is true and that these two
propositions are perfectly compatible
with each other a compatibilism has a
long and Rich history with Advocates
including Thomas Hobbes and David Hume
and more recently Daniel Dennett whose
fiery debate with Sam Harris on the
subject may be familiar to you and in
the face of this Pantheon of respected
compatibilist philosophers and detailed
arguments now stand I the third year
philosophy undergraduate with a YouTube
channel who thinks he can debunk it all
in my defense I will be relying on the
arguments of actual professional
philosophers so let's start with one of
the earliest compatibilists Thomas Hobbs
who in his magnum opus the Leviathan in
chapter 21 entitled the liberty of
subjects says the following Liberty or
Freedom signifieth properly the absence
of opposition by opposition I mean
external impediments of motion that is
to say so long as whatever you want to
do is not impeded by some external
constraint you are free that's it
so if you will to drive your car and do
so you acted freely so long as whatever
caused you to do so is internally
determined and not subject to either
compulsion or constraint by any external
factors such as your car breaking down
or something thus says Hobbes a free man
is he that in those things which by his
strength and wit he is able to do is not
hindered to do what he has a will to so
free will according to this
compatibilist can be defined simply as
the ability to do what you want to do
this seems plausible at first right if
you can do whatever you want you're a
free being
but there's a problem with this and the
problem I'm thinking of was highlighted
well by the pessimist philosopher Arthur
schoppenhauer Who pointed out that yeah
sure you can do whatever you will but
you can't will what you will right I
mean imagine that you wanted to save
money and so you put some funds into a
bank account according to Hobbes so long
as nothing external to you was
compelling you or restricting you you
acted totally freely in depositing the
money
but did you choose to want to save that
money
could you if you so please choose to
want to waste the money instead and
that's not the same thing as simply
choosing to waste it could you choose to
want to waste it I certainly can't
choose to want to waste my own money and
even if you could choose to want it
crucially in order to do so you would
need to want to want to do it and if you
could control that want you'd need to
want to want to want it and so on
forever schopenhauer's point is that the
ability to do whatever you want can
hardly be called Freedom if you can't
freely choose what it is that you want
and schopenhauer illustrates this with
an example he says that as well as the
material external constraints and
impediments that Hobbs mentions
sometimes our actions are restricted by
what schopenhauer calls moral
constraints and he gives the example of
a threat okay say someone threatens you
with assault saying that if you commit
action X they'll beat you up and that
this compels you to not commit action X
did you make this Choice freely
I think most people would say no
including perhaps Thomas Hopps who would
probably see someone threatening you as
an external constraint upon your will
making it not a free decision but what
is a threat
right if I say to you that if you commit
action X I'll beat you up you still
could commit action X and I would beat
you up right the reason the threat is
successful is simply because you don't
want to be beaten up or at least because
you want to be beaten up less than you
want to commit action X
but did you choose this
no you didn't choose to want one more
than the other you just do you couldn't
simply decide to want to be beaten up it
doesn't work like that the threat is
successful because you can't help but
not want to be beaten up and so your
action has been restricted by this
desire this want that you have
internally but this is exactly the
process that happens inside our own
minds every time we ever make a decision
right when I decide to put that money in
the bank for instance it's because I
want Financial Security more than I want
say cash in my wallet did I choose to
want one more than the other
no and I couldn't even if I tried I
don't choose to want to deposit the cash
I simply do want to deposit it and then
like a slave to my own desires I do what
I want
now for the compatible list this is
freedom because I've done what I want
but I didn't control what I wanted I was
compelled by what I wanted to say that
you can do whatever you want is to say
you can do anything so long as it's this
specific thing over which you have no
control in determining some Freedom so
this is one reason why I think that the
distinction between internal and
external constraints is a silly one and
remember compatibilism relies on this
distinction recognizing that all of our
thoughts and all of our actions are
determined but so long as they're
determined internally instead of
externally they're free and my response
has been to say that we have as much
control over our internal constraints as
we do external constraints that is we
have no control over either of them and
so there's no meaningful reason for the
compatibles to make this distinction
it's totally arbitrary in terms of what
you actually have control over and if
Free Will means to have ultimate control
over our actions we aren't free whether
the cause of our actions is internal or
external and so this is why the
compatibilist doesn't so much defend
Free Will as simply redefine free will
to them Free Will is not about actual
control over our actions it's simply
about whatever determines our actions
being internal to ourselves that is we
commit an action freely if it is a
result of internal determination even if
we have absolutely no control over that
internal cause or over the action itself
compatibilism simply states that Free
Will has nothing to do with the ability
to ultimately control your actions
instead Free Will is about committing
actions over which you may have no
control but the cause of which comes
from somewhere inside you right so
forgive me for not finding this as
satisfactory analysis of free will if
you're happy to say that you're free
despite having no control over your
actions then I think maybe we're just
talking across purposes but for the sake
of argument let me simply grant that
there is some relevant difference
between internally and externally
determined actions for whatever reason
let me simply grant that Free Will is
just the ability to act in accordance
with internal causes and without
external constraint okay even then I
think compatibilism fails and let me
tell you why remember compatibilism
assumes that determinism is true right
it's an affirmation of the compatibility
between determinism and free will if
determinism is true then everything that
happens in the universe is the result of
some previous chain of causation dating
back to the beginning of time right
every thought in your brain is
determined by something prior to it as
is whatever determined that as is
whatever determined that and so on and
so on so now let's consider the supposed
difference between an external cause of
action and an internal cause of action
that distinction which compatibilism
relies upon so the compatibilist thinks
that if say a boulder were to roll over
and knock me off a cliff I didn't freely
choose to fall off that Cliff because
the cause of my doing so was external to
me but if I jump off that Cliff then I
did act freely because the cause of me
falling off the cliff was internal to me
okay well now consider the following
let's say that I'm just walking along a
road and a boulder rolls out in front of
me and not wanting to be crushed by it I
jump out of the way
according to the compatibilist did I
freely choose to jump
well kind of I mean I did jump because I
wanted to jump I wanted to avoid being
crushed and that desire is entirely
internal
but who wouldn't want to avoid being
crushed I mean sure I wanted to jump but
the cause of that want was the boulder
something external so although the
immediate cause of me jumping was
internal ultimately the cause of my
action was external so I think it's fair
to say that I was compelled to jump out
of the way by something external to me
in the Boulder and therefore didn't act
freely but here's the thing if
determinism is true then any internal
cause for any action is ultimately
determined by something external since
if determinism is true then whatever
causes you to commit any action is
itself determined by something else and
that's determined by something else and
that's determined by something else and
so on and so forth until you get to a
time before you were born or before the
earth existed the chain of causation
that ultimately determined your action
will always stretch back to something
external just like the chain of
causation when I jumped from the boulder
stretches back ultimately to something
external even though the immediate cause
was internal my desire My want to jump
and really think about this as with my
Boulder example though the immediate
cause of my action May well be internal
it is always ultimately determined by
something external if we follow the
chain of causation back far enough now
if determinism is true then this is true
without exception right every action you
ever take is ultimately determined by
something external to you so even if the
compatible list is right that there is
some relevant difference between actions
that originate internally and those that
originate externally if determinism is
true then all actions originate
externally ultimately right there's no
such thing as an ultimately internally
determined action and therefore no such
thing according to the compatiblists
view as a free action of course you can
always simply deny the idea that our
actions are all determined in this way
but then you're just not a compatibilist
because compatibilism assumes that
determinism is true all I'm trying to
show is that if you do think determinism
is true as the compatibilist does then
you've kissed goodbye to Free Will and
even the vaguely redefined form of free
will that compatibilists hold to let
alone a kind of free will in which
you're actually in total control of your
actions and let me demonstrate this
problem a bit further by using the
terminology of the philosopher Peter Van
in wagen who in his essay the powers of
rational beings freedom of the will
defines two types of facts at the first
he describes as such there are certain
facts that no human being can do
anything about and that no human being
in history could ever have done anything
about among these are the fact that the
Earth is round the fact that magnets
attract iron the fact that there were
once dinosaurs and the fact that 317 is
a prime number even those who believe in
free will will obviously accept that
some such facts exist right facts over
which we have absolutely no control now
van in wagon calls these Untouchable
facts since there's absolutely nothing
we can do to affect their truth
now to believe in Free Will is not to
say that we have control over everything
of course just that there are some
things that we have control over that is
there are some facts that aren't
untouchable right things like deciding
to drive your car and we might call any
fact that you do get to control a
touchable fact so if Free Will exists
there are some touchable facts facts
over which you do have control distinct
from Untouchable facts like the fact
that the Earth is Globe it's as simple
as that Free Will is just the existence
of some at least some touchable facts so
here's the problem van in wagon
introduces a logical principle which
goes as follows if p is an Untouchable
fact and Q follows from P then Q is also
an Untouchable fact that is to say if
there is some State of Affairs some fact
over which you have no control which
we'll call P and if it's also true that
if P then Q then since the cause of Q is
Untouchable Q is it self Untouchable you
didn't cause it you couldn't stop it
Untouchable for example let's say that P
is the state of the universe 5 billion
years ago clearly an Untouchable fact
and let's say that Q is the formation of
the earth if the formation of the earth
follows necessarily from the state of
the universe 5 billion years ago then
since the first fact is Untouchable so
is the second now determinism is simply
the belief that for every state of
affairs cue there is some preceding
State of Affairs P which brought about Q
by causal necessity so the fact that I'm
currently saying these words was brought
about by some previous cause itself
brought about by some previous cause and
so on and so on until we get to say the
state of the universe 5 billion years
ago right in using van in wagon's
principle we can see that every single
step along the chain of causation from
the state of the universe 5 billion
years ago all the way up until now is an
Untouchable fact since whatever follows
from the state of the universe five
billion years ago go is also Untouchable
meaning that whatever follows from that
will be Untouchable and anything that
follows from that will be Untouchable
and so on until you get to any action
which we commit today which if
determinism is true and there is this
unbroken chain of causal necessity must
therefore also be Untouchable so if a
belief in Free Will is just the belief
that there exists some touchable facts
then Free Will doesn't exist unless
determinism is false because if
determinism is true then all facts are
ultimately Untouchable our compatibilism
says that both exist at the same time
that Free Will is compatible with
determinism and therefore compatibilism
must fail it's as simple as that now
interestingly van in wagon actually
concludes that Free Will does exist but
he does so on the basis that his
intuition of Free Will is just so strong
that it must be accurate even though he
has no idea how it would work and he
admits as such he essentially makes a
really great case against Free Will and
then just throws his hand up to the sky
and goes yeah well Free Will has to
exist though so it's all a grand mystery
it's quite a disappointing ending to the
otherwise brilliant essay which you can
read in full by clicking the link in the
description but remember this remember
something important both Advocates of
libertarian Free Will and those who say
that it doesn't exist think
compatibilism is false right to say that
compatiblism is false is not necessarily
to deny free will but just to deny its
compatibility with determinism so even
if you do believe in free will my
arguments can still hold up and you can
still be an incompatibilist but anyway
I'll tell you something that definitely
isn't compatible with freedom and that's
a lack of Internet Security that's right
I want to take a moment to thank
expressvpn for sponsoring today's video
God that was that was really bad I'm
sorry you had to hear that but your
freedom
if I can call it that to browse the
internet safely and securely is at risk
if you don't use a VPN every time you
connect to an unencrypted Wi-Fi network
hackers on that same network can
incredibly easily steal your data your
passwords your financial information
even your emails and on top of that when
you browse the internet which if you're
like me is something you do fairly often
your internet service provider can see
everything you do
everything and yeah going incognito
isn't going to stop them and these
providers can perfectly legally sell
your data to ad companies in my country
internet service providers are required
to keep a log of the websites that I
visit the apps that I use and the
conversations that I have expressvpn
encrypts your data hides your location
and stops all of this from happening and
since your location is hidden one of my
favorite perks of using expressvpn is
the ability to access online content
that is restricted by region that means
that I can enjoy us or Canadian Netflix
but also I've sometimes been told that
my videos are restricted in some
countries and so a tool like expressvpn
is invaluable if you want to watch
content from around the globe like mine
perhaps and do so without anybody
tracking your data so if you want a
whole three months of all of this
completely for free then click the link
in the description
expressvpn.com forward slash Cosmic
skeptic and start to enjoy the
compatibility between internet browsing
and Internet safety I also just want to
say a huge thanks to my supporters on
patreon especially my top tier patrons
as always without whom I simply couldn't
do what I do if you do like my videos
please do consider becoming a supporter
at patreon.com forward slash Cosmic
skeptic but as always I have been Alex
O'Connor don't forget to subscribe thank
you for watching and I'll see you in the
next one
[Music]


Here is an apple and here’s a banana. Pick one.  
Whichever one you picked, it was your decision,  completely. This is what we call free will. It’s  
the idea that we are the sole authors of our  destiny. That in the face of multiple choices,  
whatever decision we make is completely down  to us. We have the power of free choice.
But what if I told you that free will is a  myth? That we are all just a group of atoms  
who will react to a particular stimulus  in a way that can be predetermined?
If you picked a banana at the beginning  of the video and we go back in time,  
if free will truly exists, you should be  able to change your mind and pick the apple  
instead. But what if I told you that if we go  back in time under the exact same circumstances,  
you’ll pick the banana again? What if I told  you that I can tell which of these two options  
you’re going to pick 300 milliseconds before  you actually pick it... with 100% accuracy?
In the 1980s, Benjamin Libet,  a physiologist, used an EEG,  
an electroencephalogram, to show that you can  read and tell that somebody is about to move,  
300 milliseconds before they decide in their  conscious mind to actually move. This means  
that before we decide that we want to move our  bodies, it’s already been decided for us in our  
subconscious, and we only think that we made the  decision ourselves after it’s already been made.
In a similar study, participants were asked  to press one of two buttons while looking  
at a clock with a random sequence of letters  on a screen. With the use of fMRI, functional  
magnetic resonance imaging, they discovered that  two of the participants’ brain regions showed what  
button they would press seven to ten seconds  before they consciously made that decision.
The results of this research  only proves one thing.  
A few seconds before you pick the banana or  the apple, your brain makes that decision  
for you. It is after this decision has been made  deep in your subconscious that your brain becomes  
aware of it and we become convinced that we  are in the process of making that decision.  
Because the brain is like the heart, we  don’t tell it what to do, it just does.
So in reality, consciously making a  decision, the experience we call “free will,”  
is actually an illusion. It’s simply a  visualization of events that the brain  
has already set in motion. It tells  you what the brain has decided to do.
For as long as society has existed, we’ve  understood the role of surrounding influences  
on our decision-making. With idioms like  “it takes a village to raise a child”  
and “you are the product of your environment,” we  understand that to a great extent our upbringing,  
our parents, the society we grew up in, all of  these influence our decision making process. If  
someone is born religious, it’s not crazy to think  that they’ll be religious throughout their lives.
Taking it a step further, things like genetics  also play a huge role in our choices. Charles  
Darwin and the theory of evolution brought forward  the idea that, if species do indeed evolve,  
then things like intelligence must be hereditary.  Intelligence is a trait that helps us make better  
decisions. And while you can study hard to know  more than the average person, for the most part,  
how intelligent you are is entirely not up  to you. So, some people cannot make certain  
intelligent choices. Not because they don’t  want to, but because their genes are limited.  
In that instance, would you say the person has  the freedom to make those intelligent choices?  
Because in reality, they do not. Their  fates are predetermined by their genes.
How can we all truly have the freedom to decide  our fate when we’re not dealt equal cards from  
the start? And it’s not just the cards we’re  dealt, it’s also the ability to play those cards.  
Some are simply born better bluffers than others.
When you look at the concept of free will  critically, the whole idea seems to crumble  
pretty quickly. In fact, researchers have come  to the conclusion that believing in free will  
is like believing in religion, neither  of them agree with the laws of physics.  
Think about it, if free will truly exists and if  choice is not just a chemical process, then why  
can things like alcohol and antipsychotics  completely change a person’s behavior?
Even worse, we’ve seen brain tumors turn  people from pediatricians to pedophiles.  
Domenico Mattiello was once a  respected pediatrician. For 30 years,  
he was loved by his patients and adored by  their parents and everyone in the society.  
In a shocking turn of events, however, in 2012,  he began facing trial after being accused of  
making pedophilic advances towards his female  patients. Neuroscientific research showed that  
Mattielo had a 4-inch tumor growing at the  base of his brain that changed his behavior.
In 2002, a similar thing happened  to an American school teacher. He  
suddenly started having pedophilic urges  towards his step-daughter and was arrested.  
Then it was discovered that he had an  egg-sized tumor growing in the part of  
his brain that was supposed to be  responsible for decision-making.
After the tumor got removed, the man’s  pedophilic urges stopped completely,  
and he was able to return to his family. If free will exists, why can removing a  
tumor change a person’s choice? Is it then  possible that by altering brain chemistry or  
physical composition, we can completely  change a person’s beliefs, ideologies,  
and choices without the person  being able to do anything about it?
In more recent years, Lawyers have started using  MRI scans to help plead the case of their clients.  
With neuroscientific research proving  that brain tumors and malfunction  
caused them to commit their crimes,  it’s difficult to argue against it. 
Because if they did not have the freedom  to choose something else, then why would  
you give them the heaviest punishment  for actions they could do nothing about?
Brian Dugan was facing execution in the state of  Illinois after he pleaded guilty to murdering a  
10 year old girl. However, MRI scans revealed  that he had mental malfunctions that affected  
his decision-making process. His lawyers pleaded  with the court to spare him the capital punishment  
because in reality, can we really say it was  his fault? If malfunctions in his brain caused  
him to do what he did, then he didn’t have  the free will to make a better decision.
While he was on death row, his case  continued to get argued and as a result,  
the state of Illinois  abolished capital punishment.
Some scientists who still want to cling  on to the idea of free will argue that,  
while it’s true that the subconscious makes  decisions for the conscious, we still have  
the free will to shape the unconscious world.  And on first glance, this makes a lot of sense.
You can read a book and an idea gets into your  subconscious. Then in the face of a choice,  
the idea you’ve read floats back out of your  subconscious, forming your conscious decision.
However, there’s a flaw in that  idea. It’s much like a paradox,  
because where then does the desire to change  your subconscious by reading a book come from?  
Desire, much like choice, comes from  the subconscious. So a conscious  
effort to shape your subconscious is actually a  subconscious effort to change your subconscious.
The biggest obstacle the idea of free  will (or lack thereof) faces is morality.  
If morality is based on free will and free will  doesn’t exist, then what happens to morality? What  
happens to every other man-made institution that  has been designed around the idea of free will?  
When faced with questions like these, many  people immediately fall into a trap of fatalism.
Fatalism is the idea that we are completely  powerless in the universe’s game.  
People who think like this believe that since  we aren’t completely in charge of our destiny,  
we are completely at its mercy,  it’s random and not up to us.
Then they become a lot less happy and  start slacking in their relationships.  
They stop trying to be good people  or uphold any moral standards,  
and overall they start to have a  lower sense of fulfillment in life.
But we don’t have to fall into that trap. The  scientists who champion the idea of the absence of  
free will would rather explain it philosophically  as “determinism” rather than fatalism.
Determinism is the idea that all events  are predetermined by existing causes.  
That everything that will happen can be explained  through the clockwork laws of cause and effect.  
It doesn’t mean that we are completely powerless  and simply at the mercy of what’s to come.  
It simply gives us a different way to  look at everything that happens around us.
According to the government of the United Kingdom,  more than half of the people in prison have a  
brain injury. Doesn’t that tell a scary story?  Understanding the true concept of free will will  
help us realize that those people are no different  from us. They’re not worse humans and many times,  
they’re just there because of a combination of  bad events that were totally out of their control.
In the same way, with deterministic thinking, we  would also show more humility when talking about  
our achievements because now we understand that  we are simply a product of our past experiences.  
It helps us to have empathy for people who  are not in a similar position as we are,  
and it helps us to reduce our sense of  entitlement. If the people in higher  
positions in society do not attribute all of  their success to their personal efforts alone,  
they are more likely to do more for others. They  are more likely to help and give back to others,  
hoping they might be able to recreate  the factors that helped them succeed.
If you’re getting scared or confused right  now, I totally get it. Even the scientists  
who have been studying this for decades have  found it very disturbing. It’s a difficult  
thing to wrap your head around because it goes  against everything society is built around.
Free will is the basis of our society.  It’s what determines who is right  
and who is wrong, who gets the praise  and who deserves to be punished.  
It tells us that a man who killed another man  deserves to spend the rest of his life in prison,  
and that someone who works hard  deserves to live a good life. 
And that’s the fear of spreading the absence  of free will message. Many scientists believe  
that if enough people are aware of this idea,  it could literally end society as we know it.
Because why would someone risk his life to save  another person if after he’s done people will  
only say “well, he didn’t decide himself to  do it, so he doesn’t deserve any praise.” 
The reality is praise and punishment are two  huge factors that help influence our decisions.  
So if we remove them from our society, we pave  the way for fewer good deeds and much worse ones.
It’s a strange dilemma to be in. Because although  the truth is that we do not have free will,  
believing that we do is actually a lot better  for us. This is the concept of illusionism.  
That although free will is an illusion, it’s  one that we must keep up with. Because faced  
with the choice between truth and good, it  benefits the most of us to always choose good.
So next time you see a homeless person down  the street, don’t just roll your eyes and  
judge the person. Understand that there are  a multitude of factors, many of which they  
might not have been able to control that  have caused them to be where they are.
Be humble about what you have and what you’ve  achieved, because just a tiny less intelligence  
in your DNA and you might not have made  that one decision that changed your life. 
Know that you do not have free  will, at least how you imagine it,  
and you’re just lucky your mixture of atoms makes  the right decisions. But immediately forget that,  
forget everything I said for the past 10 minutes  and act like every decision is yours completely.
Because only then will you be able to make  the decisions that can truly change a life.


you feel like you are free free to like
the color blue more than red free to
cross the street when you want to free
to do your taxes you feel like you chose
to watch this video I disagree in fact I
don't think you're free at all I think
that Free Will is an illusion not
exactly a trick of the mind but an
evolved sense that doesn't reflect the
reality of what happens in a human brain
the consequences of this Revelation
aren't as dire as some make it seem but
I do believe that losing Free Will may
change you it might make you a more
compassionate moral person but whether
or not this actually happens isn't for
me to decide or you for that
matter the argument against Free Will
mercifully is simple no need for fancy
philosophy or religious Doctrine or
quantum mechan mechanics I ask you only
to follow what I call the great causal
chain that is if you start where you
feel the most free and Trace causality
as far back as you can I don't think
you'll find any room for the conscious
decision-making that defines free
will think about what you want to have
for dinner tonight this is an easy
demonstration of your freedom of will
right chicken or salmon pasta or
dumplings it's all up to you but when we
say you who do we mean well you are your
mind and the mind is everything your
brain is doing at this moment whether
you end up at chicken or dumplings it
will be your neurology your
neurotransmitters and how they move
about that
decides now attempt to follow more links
on the great causal chain you chose
dinner okay when did you choose your
mind that chose dinner did you choose
the environment your mind developed in
the nutrients it had access to to when
you were growing up the pollution it
Incorporated the other Minds it
interacted with when did you choose the
DNA that made your mind in the first
place or indeed the random mutations
that went into that DNA when your
parents got together who decided how
wealthy your family was where they lived
and when going back another link did
your parents have any of the choices in
this chain that you did not or their
parents or their parents and so on
if your thoughts and intentions and
actions are the product of your mind
then the Mind emerges from the billions
of neurons firing in your brain and your
brain developed under a myriad of
conditions that it didn't choose where
is Free Will the great causal chain goes
all the way back and I mean all the way
back back to the first humans back to
the first common ancestor with
chimpanzees back to the first
multicellular organisms back to the
first atoms in the universe to say that
you could have decided differently that
you were free to choose that which you
didn't is to say that the first atoms in
the universe could have combined
differently that the first organisms on
Earth could have evolved differently
that your parents could have met at a
different time or place or not at all
that you could have had a different
brain than you have right now but none
of that happened the universe is what it
is you made the choices you made and the
conscious you had nothing to do with it
I know that you don't feel this way you
don't feel beholden to the electrical
thunderstorm in your head no matter
whether or not you had a say in where it
came from or its genetic lineage but I
submit to you that this is the Free Will
illusion an illusion because you
actually do feel this way you just never
notice it with a little attention you
can see that what you feel like is
decision-making is actually just post
talk rationalization of cognitive
chaos if you really do choose your
choices how do those options arrive
let's take a moment to pay close
attention to how your choices actually
happen close your eyes I want you to
choose a major city anywhere in the
world calm your mind and choose a city a
city like Dublin or Cairo or New York or
Shanghai or karakas or keev some of you
are now probably having the sensation of
remembering that Dublin exists and that
is now influencing your
choice you initially had a explosion of
options in your mind and now you are
thinking about certain parts of the
world but I'll stop
interfering decided good now open your
eyes I want you to honestly think about
how this process just went when I asked
you to think of a city many options came
to mind then for whatever reason those
options were narrowed down why sure you
can think of a reason in retrospect you
vacationed in Dublin once or you have a
sister in New York but be honest you
have no idea why these conditions popped
up do
you why didn't you think of a city like
Christ Church a place you've always
wanted to visit why didn't you think of
Burundi a city you've never heard of
you're not free to choose the cities
that you don't randomly pop into
Consciousness are you and you're not
free to choose the cities that you don't
know
already the point of this is to try to
find the bottom level of your choices
but even for something as simple as
choosing any place in the world you
cannot account for what options you
thought of and cannot account for what
factors decided between them you were
not free to choose that which you didn't
think of and at no point did you decide
what not to think
of if you're having a hard time with
getting to the bottom of your attention
like this try it again with another
simple question close your eyes and
think of a family member or any model of
car or any
number in every case you will find that
your choices decisions and their
justifications simply appear in
Consciousness why did you think of your
brother or a Honda Accord or 47,000
203 pay close enough attention to the
next thought you think and you will see
that you have no more conscious control
over it then you have over the next word
that I say or indeed the next word that
you hear now use your newfound attention
skills and try to interrogate everything
else you feel like you have freedom over
when did you decide to scratch your nose
with your left hand instead of your
right when you were hungry when did you
decide you wanted a chicken Caesar salad
and not a burger when did you decide to
get angry when you were cut off in
traffic when did you decide to do that
extra rep at the gym when you didn't
have to when did you decide to
understand the words that I'm saying to
you
now think of Consciousness like a
thunderstorm with random flashes of
lightning seemingly appearing out of
nowhere under no control some streaks
hit the ground others reach off into the
sky the cloud doesn't choose which your
brain is like the Thundercloud a
complicated mass of electrons and water
producing strong electric signals almost
randomly a flash of intention here a
streak of opinion there a shock of motor
movement somewhere else some hit the
ground others
don't in this analogy what you act on
what you feel like you choose is no more
controlled than where the lightning
strikes when where how many times now
imagine that a thunderstorm was somehow
conscious that there was a feeling of
what it was like to be a thundercloud
knowing what we know about how
thunderclouds form and how lightning
strikes how all of that happens in what
geographic locations at what height off
the ground with what temperature with
what moisture content with what voltage
across what distance with what velocity
would you believe a thunderstorm if it
told you that it chose to strike a
certain place at a certain
time this analogy isn't perfect of
course lightning isn't truly random it
strikes in some parts of the world more
than others and it strikes certain
objects more than others lightning is
constrained to the conditions of the
atmosphere The Cloud of electromagnetism
Etc but your brain is similarly
constrained you may not ever have
thoughts or intentions outside that
which a kilogram of interconnected water
meat inside a silent Simeon skull could
physically produce but within the range
of electric potential your brain can
have if you pay attention thoughts ideas
intentions and actions just appear like
lightning human brains are more
complicated than thunderstorms maybe the
most complicated volumes in the universe
but you have no more reason to think
that a brain has free will than that
brilliant flicker of lightning does
sparkling in the dark cloud in the
distance you might now be thinking about
decisions like self-improvement
what's the point well I just happen to
have the kind of brain that will still
recommend it to you today's video is
sponsored by train well Gamers I'm
award-winning science educator and
totally in control of my own thoughts
and actions Kyle Hill as of the
publishing of this video I have been
using today's sponsor train well every
single day for an entire year why
because it's just that good baby let me
tell you about it train well formerly
co-pilot is a one one personalized
training service that gamifies
convenient Fitness to keep you
consistent take a quiz get assigned a
coach and then start cranking out guided
workouts adjusted to your goals schedule
available equipment and injuries for
example my personal coach Rod adjusts my
workout after every session is always
available via chat in the app and keeps
me consistent he knows that I have an
injured hamstring for example from rock
climbing and so we've been slowly
strengthening it three times a week for
the last 50 weeks in a row that's right
I've been using train well for the last
year straight and I'm pretty sure you
can tell the difference this gamified
approach to Fitness has changed my
health significantly take the quiz right
now to find your perfect trainer and get
14 days of free training right here on
me I don't think I'm ever going to stop
using this app to be honest it's that
good hey everyone can train but not
everyone knows how to train well that's
train well elongate yourself along the
ex
AIS if it's true that we don't have free
will it's simultaneously true that we
all feel like we do I haven't believed
in Free Will for a long time but I would
never deny that it feels like I make
choices for the sake of continuing a
casual conversation I'd say that I
decided to write this video I too labor
under the illusion I can hold this
discrepancy in my mind because an
intuitive belief in Free Will appears to
be hardwired
biologists like Roy F bow meister and
his colleagues have argued that the
feeling of a free will has been
evolutionarily beneficial to us as
highly social
primates when we feel responsible for
our thoughts and actions and hold our
fellow humans accountable for theirs
group cooperation and Rule following and
Norm maintenance becomes possible
whether Free Will is true or not bow
Meister says having a strong intuitive
belief in it would seem to facilitate
social harmony and the cognitive
capacity ities necessary for it seem to
be likely evolutionary adaptations to
Aid in group cooperation the feeling of
Free Will is hard to shake because it's
your default State Evolution wo the
feeling into your
DNA but it's not that hard to find times
when we clearly don't feel free when we
seem hopelessly compelled by completely
random thoughts and actions take the
example of Cravings I don't know about
you but sometimes I just need fast food
I don't know what last of nutrients or
dopamine or both cause this specific
craving but I know I'm going to get a
cheeseburger and fries today I might not
know when or where from but I've already
given myself up to that
decision pregnant women are famously
subject to the whim of Cravings we might
be able to say that biologically
requests for odd Foods at odd times
could be driven by what the mother and
fetus need nutritionally but why pickles
at 5:00 a.m. why not pickle chips at
12:00 p.m.
it's a silly example with larger
implications like you thinking of Dublin
and not Cairo in our experiment there
are many times when we can't consciously
account for what we
want and what we
choose feeling decidedly unfree can also
be one of the most pleasurable states to
be in take the phenomenon known as Flow
State when intentions and actions happen
automatically with almost no conscious
effort May maybe you're writing a book
and the words just tumble out of you in
the right order maybe you're playing the
guitar and the song you've been
practicing for years effortlessly comes
together maybe you're a gymnast
executing a routine that people didn't
even think was possible being locked in
like this feels amazing flow is a
complete energized enjoyable Focus no
thoughts head empty it's only when
Consciousness intrudes on your flow that
you pause or make a mistake only when
you exercise your apparent free will you
have an innate sense of free will it
likely evolved to help Foster and
maintain highly social Cooperative
groups it's our default state but it's
not the only one this is obvious when we
can't explain our desires or when we
Revel in the joy of being fully locked
in whether or not you feel free then
seems to depend on factors outside of
your conscious control you are beholden
to your biology this is most obvious in
the most tragic
examples the first mass murder to unfold
live in the era of mass media happened
on August 1st
1966 after killing his wife and mother
earlier that day a one Charles Witman
dressed up as a worker and ascended a
clock lock Tower at the University of
Texas after killing three more people he
barricaded himself on the observation
deck and then started firing a Foot
Locker full of weapons down at random
people 90 minutes later Charles Whitman
was killed by police 14 people were dead
31 wounded Whitman's suicide note read
as follows I don't quite understand what
it is that compels me to type this
letter I don't really understand myself
these days I am supposed to be an
average reasonable and intelligent young
man however lately I have been a victim
of many unusual and irrational thoughts
the note went on to request an autopsy
after he was killed I never could quite
make it these thoughts are too much for
me Whitman
wrote the next day an autopsy revealed a
bean-sized brain tumor pushing on
Whitman's amydala this tragic story was
unbelievable at the time today it's
commonplace
all too many examples of deformations of
the brain leading to Unthinkable
Behavior unprecedented Behavior unfree
Behavior most people would say that
these heinous acts weren't the men's
fault they were victims of biology but
when biology is all there is where is
there room for any inner working of the
brain to not be attributable to
circumstances that no one
controls are you not also the victim of
the brain you just happened to have have
aren't you just lucky enough that you
don't have overwhelming psychotic
delusions we already tend to view other
intelligent mammals this way beholden to
biology as silly as it sounds I have the
intuition from memes like Haram that
most of you don't want a wild animal
shot and killed for what comes to it
naturally poles find the same if a
gorilla attacks you or a shark bites you
or a bear mauls you is it really the
animals per personal moral fault again I
think most of you would say no isn't the
deadly animal just like the man with a
brain tumor a bear simply has a bear's
brain right and does what a bear
does on October 5th 2003 documentary
filmmaker Timothy Treadwell was killed
and almost fully eaten by a brown bear
as was his
girlfriend 6 minutes of the attack was
captured on audio then featured in the
2005 documentary film Grizzly Man by
verer
herzo Treadwell was an environmentalist
and founder of a bear Protection
Organization of course this didn't
matter to the
Bears unlike harambe sympathy for
Treadwell is hard to find it's a tragic
story especially combined with the
legitimately disturbing testimony from
verer hok who for some reason decided to
listen to Timothy being eaten alive but
it's not a surprising story Sur you must
never listen to this bears are victims
of their biology and no matter how much
you love them or advocate for them or
spend time with them eventually they
will be
Bears we understand the wildness of
other animals intuitively so much so
that we will even go back to work with
them after losing an arm or almost
losing a life we justify this because we
know it's not the animal's
fault the point of all of this is to say
that it's not your fault either we
understand that a person isn't free when
there's a tumor pressing on some
critical part of their brain just as we
understand the actions of a tiger or
bear but the normal structure and
function of your brain neither of which
you chose or decided is as determinant
of your choices as a brain tumor is
completely we are victims of biology all
without free will or in accepting its
non-existence it's often claimed that
the world will turn to chaos that people
will turn into nothing better than
barbarians if no one is truly
accountable for their actions how can we
feel morally justified in punishing them
for what they do I agree how could we
feel that
way returning to the evolutionary view
it makes sense that we want people to be
punished it arguably helps highly social
animals like us enforce norms and rules
and maintain the group but if if you're
not responsible for your actions as I
claim doesn't make sense to physically
or mentally harm societal
transgressors there doesn't seem to be
anything morally incorrect about
separating harmful members of society
from the rest of us if they are
unfortunate enough to be Psychopaths you
wouldn't want them around your family or
your community and a physical barrier
like a jail cell is as sensible as a
barrier between a grizzly bear and the
children at the zoo it does seem morally
incorrect however to want to inflict
physical pain in the case of the death
penalty and or mental anguish in the
case of solitary confinement on a person
who is simply unlucky enough to have the
brain that they do to have the desires
and the delusions and dangerous
intentions that they do through no fault
of their own the non-existence of Free
Will doesn't appear to immediately lead
to the total collapse of our legal
system which is fundamentally based on
the freedom of will as many claim in
fact acknowledging the reality of the
human brain May in fact benefit the
industrial punishment
apparatus moral progress is already
being made on death row in solitary
confinement and on other punishments
that feel cruel and all too usual the
only thing that is stopping us from
extending this progress from the most
heinous crimes all the way down to the
most basic misdemeanors is the illusion
that every person is directly and
personally and morally responsible for
every thought they could possibly have
and every action they could possibly
take nature versus nurture is an
outdated idea Modern Biology knows that
it's both it matters what your genes are
but it also matters where you buy your
genes from how your neurons are
connected and how you connect with your
parents how your cells run your genetic
code and what kind of friends you run
with if brain tumors and growing up in
bad areas are both completely complely
understandable reasons why someone's
behavior is determined if it makes sense
not to cuddle with grizzly bears there
is no logical reason for us not to
extend this determinism to all behaviors
and all
actions Nature has nurtured you
hopefully more positively in the exact
same way you are simply lucky enough to
be
you some philosophers like the late Dan
dennant have pointed out play where Free
Will could still be hiding in a
deterministic universe it's a simple
fact that you as an organism make
decisions you decide to go to the gym to
prefer chocolate to vanilla to say GIF
instead of GIF even though one of those
is
incorrect this is true but this isn't
free will as it's being argued against a
beetle too decides to crawl over the
twig instead of underneath it the
difference is that we feel that we have
the conscious ability to choose our
choices this feeling is an illusion for
all the reasons that we've gone through
could free will be hiding in some of the
more mysterious spots in science what
about quantum mechanics well I don't
think there's any room for Freedom here
either even if it does turn out that
Quantum Randomness is critical to
Consciousness you have no more control
over these probabilistic outcomes than
you have control over the results of
God's Tumbling Dice even the experiments
that prove free will doesn't exist
aren't really important to the basic
causal argument it's been shown for
example that if you lay a human down in
an fmri and ask them to click a button
when they first feel an inkling of a
decision on some simple task there is
some unconscious brain activity recorded
that precedes the button press this has
been interpreted in the popular media as
the brain deciding before the conscious
self decides thereby showing that the
feeling of Free Will is just that
a feeling these experiments are often
used as the ammunition by unbelievers in
the Free Will debate but in truth they
are a red herring even if they
demonstrated the opposite no significant
brain activity before a person reports
themselves consciously aware of deciding
it still wouldn't show how someone
decided to
decide no matter when and where the fmri
flares up inserting free will into the
colorful activity on screen always
creates a problem of infinite regress if
you decided when did you decide to start
deciding when did you choose to choose
to choose unlike the great causal chain
these links lead back to
nothing for free will to exist in the
way that we feel like it does requires
more than fancy philosophy or quantum
mechanics you would need a truly
separate entity unlined from the great
causal chain that was no way a product
of nature or nurture something that
could decide before decisions were made
and think of thoughts never th in our
current understanding in the physical
Universe we have no reason to believe
that such a homunculus exists or could
exist our naive dualism and evolved
sense of self makes it feel like it
could but I think if you engage honestly
with everything we've gone through so
far and pay attention to your own brain
that feeling Fades away
if it doesn't totally
disappear this argument is usually
framed as losing something if it's
indeed an illusion as I claim but I
believe you can gain from losing free
will it has made me a more compassionate
person both to myself and to
others if I am but a historian of my
feelings and intentions and actions how
can I really get lost in
regret I happen to be the kind of
organism that did the things that I did
I no longer assault my psyche with what
could have been and truthfully I have
used this Revelation to ease many
painful events in my life I believe I'm
a Kinder person to
myself of course I just also happen to
be the kind of person that considered
this argument and changed as a result
and told others about it losing Free
Will has also made me more compassionate
for other people that I otherwise
wouldn't have any compassion for how can
I hate the murderer or the abuser or the
criminal for simply being unlucky enough
to be
them I can and absolutely do think they
should be separated from society
depending on their crimes but I'd also
say the same thing about sharks and
beaches to me it doesn't make moral
sense to inflict physical and mental
harm and anguish and torture on these
unfortunate people no more than it makes
sense to shoot the gorilla who has a
Natural Curiosity towards small gorilla
shaped objects that fall into its
enclosure losing Free Will in this way
forces compassion in uncomfortable
places places where often the most moral
growth is needed in the end I'd be the
first person to admit that whether or
not we have free will it doesn't really
matter the illusion is strong enough
even in unbelievers like me that I don't
think it would make a dent outside of
Academia if I produced a mathematical
proof of its non-existence still if it's
the pursuit of truth that we're
ultimately after in science then that
truth is worth pursuing and trying to
come to terms with no matter how
unintuitive and mentally destabilizing
it may be of course whether or not any
of this will land with you isn't for me
to decide or you for that
matter until next
time and again free will or not I'm
still the kind of human that recommends
personal training take the train well
quiz to find your perfect trainer and
get 14 days of free training on me right
now thanks for watching
[Music]
[Music]


What Made You Click?
[Music]
hey welcome thank you so much for
clicking on this video
but why did you click on this video not
even 10 seconds ago you were mindlessly
scrolling through your YouTube feed and
then you saw this title in thumbnail and
something in your brain had to know what
it was about so you clicked
but what was that something in your
brain seriously tell me I might get my
click rates up but for real though we've
got a motor cortex a visual cortex and
AIO
cortex but where did decisions come from
that question got a lot more complicated
in the 1960s when a new surgery started
being performed on people with extreme
epilepsy it was called a corpus
callosotomy or split brain surgery yeah
try to guess what they do yeah they
split the brain in half of course the
brain is already pretty much split in
half between the left and right
hemispheres but they're connected at the
bottom by a bundle of fibers called the
Corpus kosum so yeah they just kind
of cut those fibers this made it so the
two halves of the brain couldn't
communicate with each other which sounds
like it would be a huge problem um but
believe it or not they went on to live
normal lives this surgery didn't change
people's personalities or ability to
function but there were some kind of
weird things that came out of it you
know things like their left hand would
start drawing something and they didn't
know
why it's like there was something in
their right hemisphere that was trying
to communicate there were kind of like
two different people in there so if
that's the case the question becomes
which one of those two entities are you
know running
things the subject of split brain
Who's In Charge?
experiments has come up from time to
time on this channel but I don't think
I've ever really done a full video on it
so I decided to do one because this
topic is one of those things that just
really caused this shift in like how I
see the world how I see other people um
how I see myself and it came from a book
that I'll be sourcing quite a bit in
this video and I highly suggest you read
it uh it's called who's in charge by the
neuroscientist Dr Michael Gaga taking
tropus notes as you can see he did
pioneering work on split brain patients
in the 60s and 70s he's written several
books about it done TED Talks I'll link
it all below but the reason this book
speaks to me if I may I don't know get a
little personal for a second I I've kind
of always had this theory that there's
different gnomes in my head obviously I
don't think that actual garden gnomes
are living inside my
skull that's
crazy but like most people I imagine I
do have kind of kind of different voices
in my head that have thoughts that
Bubble Up from time to time some of
which I don't even agree with I call it
a defense mechanism call it a
rationalization of bad ideas or whatever
but that was kind of my way of
explaining why I sometimes had
conflicting ideas or had troubl making a
decision um or like the negative
thoughts that kind of take over
sometimes that's that's the negative
gnome taking the wheel not much unlike
the world they created in the movie
Inside Out which I just saw for the
first time uh fairly recently and I've
got to say like the way that they
structure that world inside of her head
to explain how memories work and
emotions work um I thought it was
brilliant something else I liked about
the movie was that the stakes were so
small but it still felt like a big thing
like the the climax of this movie is a
little girl telling her parents that
she's sad and it carried more emotional
weight than all these movies were like
the world ending is at stake you know
anyway the point is that this book and
the split brain experiments that he
talks about in this book seemed to make
the argument that my little gnomes
explanation for how my thoughts work
isn't too far off the
mark and that Free Will and
Consciousness is Just an Illusion
there's a lot to unpack here so maybe we
Split-Brain Surgery
could start by asking the obvious
question which is why were they cutting
people's brains in half again yeah it's
a procedure called a corpus colotomy and
they started doing it first back in the
1940s as kind of a last resort treatment
for severe epilepsy here's how it works
when you have a seizure what happens is
that there's a surge of electrical
signal that disrupts the normal firing
of neurons across the brain depending on
where this occurs in the brain you'll
experience different symptoms for
example an ocular seizure might give you
a a flash of light but the worst of
course are the ones that spread over the
entire brain these can lead to Temporary
paralysis and convulsions vomiting
basically everything you think of when
you hear the word seizure and in people
who get these multiple times a day to
the point that they can't even function
normally and no treatments seem to stop
it well the best option is to just
contain it so the Corpus callosotomy is
done to prevent the signals from
spreading to the entire brain so it
stays in whatever h Spirit started in
kind like a surge protector the First
Corpus callosotomy was done in 1936 by a
neurosurgeon named Walter Dandy uh kind
of on accident he was removing a tumor
on a patient's pineal gland and it
required him to cut through the Corpus
kosum to get to it he reported that this
had no real effect on his patient which
there had been a debate for a long time
about what the Corpus kosum was actually
for like was it actually involved in
processing or was it just structural
just kind of there to hold the brain
together um the result of this experim
expent seem to suggest the latter
regardless in 1940 William P van wagen
and decided to try a corpus colotomy on
an epilepsy patient and he saw mixed
results at first but they were promising
enough to continue experimenting with it
by the way this is all starting to sound
kind of familiar all of this happened
about the same time as the labotomy
which I I covered fairly recently this
was basically the period of Neuroscience
when they started paying attention to
the white matter fibers and cutting
connections just to see what would
happen I should be clear though while
the btoes were being handed out like
candies split brain surgeries were much
more extreme and pretty controversial at
the time actually this was only for
people with a very specific very
debilitating condition and even then it
was only a last resort it really wasn't
until the 60s when two neuroscientists
named Joseph Bogen and Philip vogle kind
of perfected the procedure and it became
thought of as an effective safe
treatment but not without a few weird
side effects like sometimes they had
trouble getting their two hands to work
together um one patient talked about how
he had trouble buttoning his shirt
because he'd be buttoning it up with one
hand and then his other hand would would
go up behind it and unbutton everything
that he had just buttoned and stories
like this just kept coming up like
patients whose hands would just grab
things for no reason or or would mess
with the other hand um to the point that
Joseph Bogan decided probably somebody
should research this luckily he knew
just the perfect person to do this a
neuropsychologist named Roger Sperry
Roger sper was born and raised in
Hartford Connecticut and went to overlin
college on a scholarship where he
originally wanted to major in English uh
but he took an intro to psychology class
that sparked an interest in Psychology
yeah The Story Goes that apparently his
Professor was disabled so Roger sper
kind of helped him to to get around and
took him to various places and stuff so
he wound up kind of sitting in on
conversations that this professor was
having with his colleagues uh talking
about their research debating different
psychological theories and whatnot and
he just got sucked into it he just found
it fascinating so he got his master's
degree in Psychology and later a PhD
from the University of Chicago and then
he went into his career he became more
interested in neuronal specificity in
brain circuitry basically like how
different parts of the brain work and
how they're connected did experiments on
rats and salamanders and involved kind
of rewiring their nerves like in their
legs and their eyes to see if they could
adjust um spoiler alert they couldn't
but through all of his research he kind
of became known as an expert and how
different parts of the brain uh work and
how they talk to each other so of course
Bogan thought that he would be just the
right guy to study split brain patience
and of course sper took him up on it
because what an amazing opportunity he
did also do some experiments on animals
before he went into his human research I
know none of us like to hear about
animal experiments but he did do some
Corpus colos odies on some cats and
tested them luckily he didn't have to do
the surgery on the split brain patients
CU well that had already been done so SP
The Two Hemispheres
found a group of Bogan patients that
were willing to volunteer for his tests
which focus on Vision language and motor
skills this would involve showing words
or images to the left or right visual
fields to see how the different
hemispheres handled
it this requires some explanation as you
may already know the hemispheres are
what they call contralateral meaning the
left hemisphere controls the right side
of the body and the right hemisphere the
left side of the body um also known by
its technical term crisscross applesauce
but your eyes are a little bit weirder
it's not quite as simple as just each
eye goes to the opposite hemisphere they
they go to both hemispheres at the same
time what happens is the two optic
nerves converge at a spot known as the
optic Chasm and there they split apart
with one split carrying the left visual
field and the other one carrying the
right visual field and then the left
visual field from both eyes gets sent to
the right Hemisphere and the right
visual field from both eyes gets sent to
the left hemisphere so it's still
controlateral but with extra steps so if
you're staring at my face right now Zoe
is in your right visual field you're
seeing her blessing you with both eyes
but it's the left side of the brain
that's processing that image your right
hemisphere literally can't see Zoe right
now but it knows she's there because the
left side sharing that information
through the Corpus kosum but what if you
don't have a Corpus kosum this is what
Roger sper wanted to figure out so he
came up with a series of tests along
with his graduate student Michael Gaga
the guy who wrote this book sorry I just
have to clarify one one more thing
before I get into the results of that
test um a lot of the basic functioning
of the body takes place in What's called
the subcortical region this is an area
that's actually shared by both
hemispheres of the brain this includes
structures like the thalamus the
hippocampus the amydala and a lot of
other things that you probably never
heard of but these kind of handle the
basic stuff like motor control sensory
processing um something they call
proprioceptive sense which is basically
our sense of our body's position in
space so that's handled before
everything gets split up there's no one
hemisphere that controls that this also
includes what Dr Gaga calls an
integrated spatial attention system
which is basically something that
directs where the brain pays attention
to things so uh it's not like you could
be doing homework with one side of your
brain and gaming with the other side of
the brain that'd be nice though anyway I
know that was a lot of exposition but
it's just all stuff you kind of need to
know before we get into the good stuff
so here comes the good stuff so one of
the first patients that they studied was
a man named WJ um they kept their names
Anonymous for obvious reasons wj's test
started out pretty simple they showed
him pict and words in a right visual
field and then he was able to respond
with his left hemisphere a dog a car a
spoon easy easy because The Language
Center is on the left side of your brain
but when they showed an image in his
left visual field that went to his right
side of the brain he claimed that there
was nothing there now this was a really
big moment because up to this point
there was still a bit of a debate around
how much the Corpus kosum controlled the
flow of information between the two
hemispheres and this seemed to be
indisputable proof because it wasn't
that the right hemisphere spere couldn't
see the object they could see it just
fine it's that The Language Center of
the brain is in the left hemisphere so
it literally didn't have the words to
describe it so based off of this they
tried a new experiment uh this time with
a basic flashing light so what they did
was they put his hands under a barrier
so his eyes couldn't see his hands and
he gave each hand a button and he told
him whenever he saw a flash of light to
click the button and then confirm it
verbally by saying light so they
signaled his left hemisphere he clicked
the button he said light then they
signaled his right hemisphere he clicked
the button and then said hey why did I
click that button he didn't see the
light but the right hemisphere did and
it was able to communicate that it did
it just couldn't do it with language
it's kind of like the left hemisphere
has a voice and the right doesn't but
now they were figuring out how to talk
to the right
Hemisphere and now things get a lot more
interesting these kind of results bore
themselves out over and over and over
again with other split brain patients as
well like in one experiment the left
hand was placed in a box a handful of
objects in it and then they flash an
image of the object in the right
Hemisphere and the left hand was able to
feel around and and pick out the right
object when they asked the patient why
he grabbed that object of course he had
no idea and sometimes a patient could
just draw the image for example they
flashed an image of a bike at the right
hemisphere of one patient and then his
left hand drew a bike but think about
the experience that the patient is
having he's he's just sitting there he's
got a pencil in his left hand and he's
waiting for them to flash an image at
him and he's
waiting and then his left hand just
draws a bike these experiments would
The Differences In The Hemispheres
progress and become more complex over
time and they begin to understand just
how different their left and right
brains really are you know how we always
talk about left brain people being
analytical and right brain people being
more creative that whole thing well
here's how the two hemispheres are
actually different basically the right
hemisphere was better with Visual and
spatial skills and the left hemisphere
was good with language like you
described an experiment where the
patient was flashed a picture of a a
pattern of colored blocks and then he
had to recreate it and when they flashed
the right hemisphere the left hand was
able to recreate it really easily so the
right hemisphere was really good at that
but when they did that with the left
brain the right hand just it really
struggled with it in fact there's one
story of a patient who was struggling to
put it together with his right hand and
his left hand kept trying to help he had
to actually sit on his left hand to keep
it from trying to help the right hand
out to solve the problem according to Dr
gag a quote the right hemisphere turned
out to be specialized for such tasks as
recognizing upright faces focusing
attention and making perceptual distin
the left hemisphere was the intellectual
it specialized in language speech and
intelligent Behavior there were also
differences in logic and problem solving
between the hemispheres like they show
the right hemisphere a picture of water
and the guy would point to a picture of
water then they show the picture of a
pan and the guy would point to a picture
of a pan but when they asked what they
could do with those two items the right
hemisphere just couldn't quite figure
that out whereas the left hemisphere
knew right away that you put the water
on the pan the right hemisphere also
struggled to come up with inferences
like in another experiment they showed a
picture of a match and then a picture of
a wood pile and they couldn't quite
figure out that the next image in that
series should be a burning wood pile and
in another experiment the patient was
shown the letter U and asked to turn it
into a square using a choice of shapes
and the right brain couldn't do it but
the left brain had no problem like the r
brain is very literal things just are
what they are um he uses the example of
a box of candy so like if somebody gave
you a box of candy your right brain
would just be like yes that is a box of
candy but your left brain will try to
figure out out why they gave you a box
of candy what this means is that both
halves of the brain are experiencing
Consciousness but very different kinds
of Consciousness as Dr Gaga puts it
quote it was becoming apparent that the
right hemisphere had its own Rich mental
life quite different from that of the
left so right away we can see that
there's not just one Consciousness going
on inside our minds there's
two but it actually gets crazier turns
out um it's actually multiple modules
inside each of the hemispheres that can
display a
kind of
Consciousness and they have their own
things to say so remember earlier when I
was talking about um you know trying to
imagine what it must be like for these
split brain patients when their left
hand just kind of randomly does
something beyond their control how weird
that must be well U Spar and gag uh were
wondering the same thing so they began
developing tests to see how patients
explain these actions like the left
brain normally has a gigabit internet
connection with the right they're
sharing everything but now it can only
get information from seeing what the
brain does exter internally from the
from the pictures that it points to and
the words that it writes and whatnot and
if the left brain is more interpretive
in wired defined
patterns what would it interpret from
that turns out a lot so in one
experiment a patient was shown a chicken
claw to his left hemisphere in a snow
scene to his right he was then asked to
choose a picture that related to what he
was shown so his right hand pointed to a
picture of a chicken which obviously
makes sense because the guy saw a
chicken foot but then his left hand
pointed to a shovel which makes sense
because his original picture was a snow
scene
but he didn't consciously see the snow
scene so when they asked him why he
selected that shovel he said quote Oh
that's simple the chicken claw goes with
the chicken and you need a shovel to
clean out the chicken shed the left
hemisphere without hesitation came up
with a justification for what the right
hemisphere chose it didn't say I don't
know which would have been the correct
answer it didn't say well maybe it's
this I'm just guessing no it it
confidently declared chicken poop and
this was a result that repeated itself
over and over and over again in another
example the word music was FL to the
left brain and a photo of a bell was
flashed at the right brain he was then
given several images to choose from
these images were all musical
instruments by the way uh including the
Bell so the patient acknowledged that
he'd read the word music with his
speaking left brain and then his left
hand controlled by his right brain
picked the Bell image when asked why he
picked the Bell over all the other
musical instruments the patient said
quote well the last time I heard any
music was the bells banging outside here
there was a church across the street
again the left brain having absolutely
no idea that the right brain had seen a
B confidently came up with the
justification one more example of this
was an experiment where they flashed the
word red to his left hemisphere and the
image of a banana to his right
hemisphere he was then asked to draw a
picture with his left hand out of an
assortment of different colored pencils
so he picked the red pencil and he drew
a banana but when they asked him why he
drew a banana he said quote it was the
easiest to draw with his hand because
this hand can pull down easier which by
the way makes absolutely no sense but
that's what The Interpreter came up with
and this was the name that they gave it
by the way they call it the interpreter
module they also found the inter modu
hard at work explaining emotional
triggers so for example in one
experiment they showed the right
hemisphere a scene from a fire safety
video where a guy gets pushed into a
fire and the patient just reported that
she only saw a white flash but then
afterwards she noticed a change in her
mood she said quote I don't really know
why but I'm kind of scared I feel jumpy
I think maybe I don't like this room or
maybe it's you you're getting me nervous
in another experiment with a female
patient they uh flashed the picture of a
pinup girl to her right Hemisphere and
then without knowing why she kind of
snickered little and when they asked her
why she was laughing she said that they
had a funny machine like have you ever
had a a random mood change like suddenly
you just get angry or sad and you don't
know
why there's stuff going on in there and
in case you haven't noticed in every
single one of these examples The
Interpreter module was wrong often
confidently wrong it got limited amount
of information and assumed it knew
everything about
it might as well call it the dun and
Krueger module and yet this module is
kind of running the
brain or at least navigating our
thoughts it's further testing revealed
that The Interpreter module is just one
of multiple modules in the brain all of
them kind of black boxes like we don't
really know how they make their choices
but they make choices and then The
Interpreter module justifies it like for
example fmri tests showed that different
areas of the brain would light up before
a conscious decision was made to say
take an action or to say something that
was a decision being made before the
decision was made this is basically how
we live our lives just walking around
justifying the decisions and thoughts
that pop into our heads from various
random semiconscious modules in our
skull this fact has been such a
revelation for me
because I don't really think of my
thoughts and my actions as me doing it
anymore you know I I mean yes it's me
I'll get to the theory of mind around it
in just a second but it's a lot easier
to look at your thoughts and beliefs
objectively if you if you don't think of
it as being part of you like when I have
a thought that comes up I don't know
where it came from so I can just ignore
it if I don't like it uh you know it's
not tied into my sense of self my ideas
aren't my identity and it's a lot easier
to change your mind on something if you
don't have it tied to your identity also
once I understood that our brains are
just constantly justifying things just
justification machines basically I find
myself often just kind of pausing and
asking myself like what am I justifying
right
now usually when I'm procrastinating on
work like here's a crazy thing that we
do have you ever noticed like that you
felt anger or annoyance at someone after
you've hurt them in some way
um I mean like like we we've all done it
we hurt people's feelings we failed to
live up to a promise betrayed someone it
happens that's life but there's a
psychological phenomenon that happens
where like we know we hurt someone and
we feel bad about it but then that
justification module kicks in and just
sees that you know you feel bad and it
has something to do with that guy well
that guy must have done something wrong
and then you end up feeling resentment
toward the person that you hurt which is
crazy but we all do it we are constantly
justifying bad behavior and bad habit
and the service of comfort or protection
or just a dopamine hit that's normal it
makes us human but the awareness of
it can kind of change your life but the
other mind-blowing part of it gets into
questions of free will like what is
The Question of Free Will and Emergence Theory
actually controlling our decisions there
are some that make the argument that
this disproves free will that our
decisions are made by patterns of
neurons firing in a predetermined manner
that we're not even consciously aware of
our decisions at all these guys call
themselves deter mins taken to an
extreme one might make the argument that
nobody can be held accountable for their
actions at all because they weren't the
ones that made the decision to take that
action yeah seriously try that in a
court to law it doesn't work and this
obviously can also be used by people who
justify bad behavior because well I'm
not the one who chose to do it obviously
this is a bit of a a philosophical
slippery slope like you know how do you
have Justice and accountability in the
world if there's no free
will but also how can you have free will
when your decisions aren't your own to
find an answer to this we we have to go
a little bit deeper into the nature of
Consciousness itself it's time to talk
about emergence theory in Dr Gaga's book
he talks about the quantum world and how
it operates on vastly different rules
from the macro World we've talked about
it here on this channel a million times
but these atoms and subatomic particles
that just don't play at all in the
Newtonian or even einsteinian rules that
we experience um they mostly exist in
probability States actually they managed
to come together and combined to make
physical matter the a you're breathing
the chair you're on the the building
around you even yourself this is
emergence Theory the idea that objects
in one system can combine to create
something entirely different in another
system and gagaa talks about two forms
of emergence strong and weak emergence
he explains quote there are two schools
of thought on emergence in Weak
emergence the two properties arise as a
result of interactions at an elemental
level and the emergent property is
reducible to its individual components
that is you can figure out the steps
from one level to the next which would
be the deterministic view whereas in
strong emergence the new property is
irreducible it's more than the sum of
its parts and because of the
amplification of random events the laws
cannot be predicted by an underlying
fundamental Theory or form an
understanding of the laws of another
level of organization an example that's
always used of emergence is how like
millions of individual ants with very
basic programming can come together and
and build giant ant colonies that are
basically superorganisms with
organization and structures that would
be impossible for any one ant to
conceptualize one could draw the same
conclusion about people like forming
cities or people forming the internet
but our brains work the same way
actually we have a few different levels
of emergence we have the atoms combining
together to make the organic molecules
that comprise of neurons you have the
neurons firing in patterns that create
this you know subconscious module that's
going on in your head and then you have
the multiple modules coordinating to
create our lived experience of
Consciousness actually it's kind of
funny I've talked about octopuses in the
past on here and how they have this
seemingly alien form of intelligence
where they essentially have nine brains
because each arm has a little
mini brain controlling it with an
executive brain that sort of manages all
of it uh it's like a hierarchical brain
system that I've always thought was
fascinating cuz like it's hard for us to
even conceptualize that but it turns out
in a lot of ways our brains work pretty
much the same way we have multiple
semiconscious modules that coordinate at
times and jockey for position at times
with an executive justifier module that
takes in all their signals and tries to
make sense of it and again determinists
would look at this and say that it's all
pre-wiring we have no conscious control
over it we are basically that guy from
Men In Black with the Christopher
walking looking alien in its head drink
the
coffee so yeah our feeling of free
choice and agency over our actions is a
bit of an
illusion except hold on that doesn't
make sense does it if our thoughts and
actions are hardwired and controlled by
some wizard behind the curtain then how
do we explain
neuroplasticity how do we learn new
skills how do we get better with
practice the fact is according to the
book anyway Consciousness is a result of
both bottom up and top down causation we
are simultaneously making decisions on a
subconscious level but also shaping
those decisions at a conscious level it
is possible it's not easy but it's
possible to change a pattern of negative
thinking by being aware of it and
replacing negative thoughts with
positive thoughts we do have to various
degrees conscious control over our
emotions and thoughts in Dr Gaga's words
quote action is made up of complimentary
components arising from within and from
without that is how the machine the
brain Works thus the idea of downward
causation may be confusing our
understanding what is going on is the
match between our everpresent multiple
mental States and the impinging
contextual forces within which it
functions our interpreter then claims we
freely made a choice I guess to put the
question of whether we have upward or
downward causation in simpler terms
maybe both is happening at the same time
so do we have free
will yes and no a lot of our decisions
it seems are hardwired and out of our
control but ultimately we do have
conscious control over our actions we do
have agency this isn't a get out of jail
free card sadly if you want to commit a
crime and get away with it you're going
to have to do it the oldfashioned way be
rich anyway there's a lot more in this
book that I couldn't F this video it
goes on into how our brains work um
socially how we have mirror neurons that
cause us to mimic other people
subconsciously it's a fascinating book
and definitely worth to read I'll put a
link down in the description but again
for me there's there's actually
something kind of freeing about the idea
that there's a lot going on up there
that I don't have control of um I don't
have to beat myself up for my thoughts
I'm able to give myself a little Grace
when I mess up um it's just a much
better head space for me yeah ironically
the idea that I'm not totally in control
is is kind of freeing it it it gives me
objectivity and it makes me a lot less
reactive I I truly believe that my life
has been made better by having this
understanding and that's why I talk
about it so much that's why I made this
video because I genuinely think it can
help you too and even at a societal
Sponsor - Henson Shaving
level like if everybody had this
understanding I think we would be a lot
better to ourselves and we'd be a lot
better to each other something else I
can honestly say has made my life better
is developing new personal hygiene
habits specifically when I stopped using
cartridge razors and started shaving
with this bad boy the Hinson Razer so
here's the deal if you were born after
1970 chances are you never actually used
this kind of Razor you probably used one
of these cartridge razors and that's
because right around that time shaven
companies um
started scamming us that's right I said
scam they realized that the real money
is in the blades so if they sold you a
handle for next to nothing they could
jack up the prices of the Blades by
claiming their special magical devices
that can shave your face better than the
other guys blades so they started adding
more and more gimmicks to the cartridges
it started with two and then three
blades I think we're up to five or six
blades now with a lubricating strip and
a bristle brush and Bluetooth connection
and GPS navigation I'm exaggerating but
you you get the point they keep hyping
up these new Innovations which are
really just reasons to raise the price
even further cartrid blades are like $2
to4 now and the best part is they don't
even work very well cuz the blades are
just kind of loose and flexible which
means they' kind of Bounce and Skip
across the surface of your skin
producing what professionals call
chatter but what you and I might call
this leads to skin irritation and razor
burn which we've all just kind of
learned to accept at this point here's
how Henson fixes that they use a basic
two-sided blades that only cost 10 cents
each but they support them all the way
across at a depth of just 27 microns
that's point 0016 in thinner than a
human hair this constant support all the
way across the blade prevents it from
skipping and bouncing on your skin and
the perfect 30° angle gives it the
optimum contact with the skin to get the
closest shave yeah the Precision of the
engineering on this thing is kind of
absurd they're actually made in a
machine shop that produces Aerospace
parts so they're designed to be insanely
accurate seriously the guys who make
this razor have machine parts for the
Mars perseverance Rover they made stuff
that's on Mars right now the best part
is the blades are cheap they're totally
recyclable so you won't be dumping a
bunch of plastic waste in your landfill
even the razor itself is aluminum so if
for some reason you decide you don't
want it anymore even that can be
recycled cost-wise they flip the entire
razor model on its head so instead of
making a cheap basic handle and then
charging out the Wazoo for you know the
rest of your life you pay a little front
for the razor and then the blades are
super cheap after that literally 10
cents each you make back the money you
spend on the handle in like 6 months and
after that you're literally saving money
forever in fact if you go to hints and
shaving decom and throw 100 pack of
blades on your order then into the code
shaving with Joe at checkout you'll get
those blades for free 100 blades totally
free and you can get like five to seven
shaves out of each blade so yeah just do
the math on how long those blades will
last you seriously I've been using
Hinson for a couple of years now and I'm
maybe a quarter of the way through the
box that's in my bathroom right now um
you literally won't pay another dime on
shaving for a couple of years after
buying H and razor it's just it's just a
much smarter Choice So speaking to
whatever brain module is making your
decisions go check out Henson shaving at
Henson shaving
docomo shaving with Joe for the free
blades Henson has been an amazing
sponsor and they make an amazing product
so thanks to Henson and thanks to you
guys for checking them out all right
that's it for today hope you guys
enjoyed it thanks so much for watching
if this is your first time here um maybe
check out this video it'll be on another
psychological topic cuz you clicked on
this video for a reason brain stuff uh
also if you look on the sidebar if
you're on your browser there's probably
some other thumbnails down there that
have my face on them go check them out
and if you enjoy them I do invite you to
subscribe I come back with videos every
Monday and that's it for today thank you
guys so much for watching you go out
there now have an eye opening rest of
the week stay safe and I'll see you next
Monday love you guys take care


Introduction: Free Will
all of a sudden I I said to myself is everything in
society explainable in this way and then I realized oh my gosh if it is then our
entire moral code has to
[Music] shift this is Star Talk Neil degrass Tyson here your personal astrophysicist
and I got Chuck nice with me Chuck how you doing man I'm doing great Neil thanks for asking okay Chuck Nice a
professional standup comedian and actor here's a subject we haven't yet tackled
okay it's the subject of Free Will yes it came up in the edges I was gonna say
we've we've tinkered around the edges just the edge we couple conversations
with Brian Green couple conversations with Heather Berlin a couple uh Neuroscience conversations that we we
got another neuroscientist here here Robert sapolsky a neuroscientist
biologist he's a professor of biology neurology and Neuroscience and
neurosurgery can you be any more neuro than that I think that's all the neuros I think that's all the
neuros or neurotic that's the one at Stanford University uh
best-selling author of eight books right I have one in my hand right now came out just months ago wow determined a science
of life without Free Will wow and that's going to be a major subject of our
conversation today welcome to the show Rob well thanks thanks for having me on
before we continue here let me just tell our audience you captured so much of this life's profile in a memoir that you
write just tell us briefly about your Memoir then we're going to pick up the Free Will discussion oh sort of one of
my not even marginally scientific books that I cranked out it's called a primates Memoir and basically just
stories of the 30 OD years hanging out with both the baboons but sort of places
there in East Africa I was there for one coup attempt I was there for one Civil
War I was so you know a interesting
colorful place to be a Kid From Brooklyn who knows nothing about the outside world so that that was a fun thing to
write I'm glad you you documented that because if if it's a story that others will never have or can't even imagine
that's got to be in print somewhere so that we can access it yeah so so tell me
so this is a fascinating birthplace for the ideas that maybe we're not entirely
in control of our own behavior so how did this rise up to become your central
Focus thinking when thinking about Free Will well actually just to just to undo
all of that um I already didn't believe in free fre will I was 14 when I had this incredibly epipal night where I
suddenly decided there's no free will um I also as long as I was at it that night
decided there's no God and there's no purpose and it's just a big empty and different Universe it it was interesting
stuff going on the days before were there were there mushrooms involved in
this no no but there there was there was religious trauma instead which I think
is a much more effective way of ING with your head um so it was it was a wonderful sort of clarity of oh I get it
became nihilist this I think that's yes that's when that word applies nihilism nistic yes so I I have not believed in
Free Will since then so all all baboon ecological physiology and all rat
The Impacts of Biology & The Hungry Judge Effect
monkey mice Neuroscience did was just add more factoids to like we're just
machines we're biological machines wow all right so so give us your the the
central points of your thesis then um you can't just say well I don't think
we're have free will anymore um give me some give me some foundations for this
well it's this basic deal where like somebody does something and you wonder
like why that happened why they did what they just did and like if you want to unpack it part of the answer to that is
is cuz this was going on in this part of the brain a second before while this part of the brain went silent or that
sort of thing but you're also asking wow well the person hadn't eaten yet today
they were sleep deprived they were happy they were stressed they were in pain whatever what's what's the hungry judge
effect that that reminds me oh it's the I love it the hungry judge I remember something like 10 years ago like if you
get convicted before lunch your your senten is higher than after lunch yes
exactly it was it was this classic study preceding National Academy of Sciences
they looked at every parole decision made in this this judicial County or
whatever over the course of a year like a thousand of them looking at what predicted the judge letting the guy walk
versus sending him back from more jail and the single best predictor was how many hours it had been since the judge
had eaten the meal oh I I I thought it was definitely how black the guy was
standing oh well that that's after we that get get the one that explains about
99% of the variability once once that's sorted out the other extraneous another variance in the for of okay all right so
so that's shocking and disturbing just simultaneously and so if the judge
presumably the judge is thinking the judge is making the right decision in that moment but in fact they don't even
know influenced because they can't even if you were maybe you could correct for it by the way that that got challenged
for its statistics and they they responded adequately and I it's solid
science and it's been replicated do not go and apply for a home loan in a bank
if the person you're talking to hasn't eaten for four hours other versions of that interestingly the more hours a
medical resident is Gone without sleeping if they're white the more implicit bias they show on tests by the
end of their sleep deprived lunatic work period so yeah that's what's up with the
judges all sorts of stuff like that mild effects these are not but they're just
part of this picture of stuff going on underneath the surface so that's that's like how many hours it's been since
you've eaten that's but then you got to figure like what have hormones been doing in the last 24 hours because
they're marinating your brain and having influences and then you got to figure what have the recent months years
decades been like did you get traumatized did you find God did you find love did you lose either what
because that changes the brain and by the way the food thing that became an entire
commercial line for Snickers candy bar yeah are you hangry hangry oh what a
great and the most amazing thing is it makes sense like O blood glucose levels
are low when you haven't eaten and it turns out the part guys are craby they're all in a car on a road trip and
one guy's just completely crab and and actually it's usually some other famously crabby famous person right
so that's who they turn into and then they give them a Snickers bar and then they're back to their back to their
normal self that's oh finally science influencing commercial America so reasonably and it makes perfect you know
you're looking guy he looks nothing like you he's got a background that has nothing in common with you and you're
deciding is this a person who has reformed or and it takes some work to
see the world from this person's perspective it takes some work to try to think about how they turned out to be
different from who you are it takes work brain work and the most expensive part
of your brain is the one that you're working at that point and if your GL glucose levels are low in your bloodstream what the hell let's just go
with an easy answer it's very mechanistic and it's exactly what you say you sit the judge down at that point
and say whoa that's really interesting remember just after lunch you pared this guy and this guy just now did the same
thing and you set him back for another 50 years in jail what's up with that and they'll quote freshman year philosophy
they're not going to say oh because I was mildly hypoglycemic in my frontal cortex delusional delusional in their
own intent yes yes exactly yeah so the the big takeaway here is if you are ever
before any judge make sure that you offer them cookies before they exactly
exactly and the other advice is find a way to mention that it's your birthday
there's even been a study showing judges give slightly shorter sentences if they're aware to the defendant not if
yesterday was or tomorrow was it's got to be the day terrible social conflict
conflict number one we need to protect Society from d dangerous rapacious people conflict number two be nice to
The Physicist Perspective on Free Will & Chaos Theory
people on their birthday and somehow it balances out and you get a slightly
shorter sentence by the way I fully Embrace
everything you've said and I did I've done some recent amateur thinking about
Free Will and I want to share some of those ideas with you um but they will
fully resonate with everything you said thus far but I have to bring in sort of the physicist perspective of Free Will
where if every action has a a preceding action to it you just take that all the
way back till it's no longer in your Consciousness right and then something
set those series of synaptic trips in sequence and then you end up saying
something or doing something so this so the the physicist's cause and effect
argument um how does what you say tale with that or are you are you saying something slightly different
philosophically um actually very similar I you know Behavioral Sciences biology
whatever discovered made this major discovery recently by which I mean somewhere in the last couple of
centuries which is something happened because of what came just before that and that happened because of what CH and
you know that whole deal I freak out when we've gotten anywhere near the Big Bang because I understand zero about
that but at the very least to and how do you turn out to evolve into the sort of species you are yeah you look at
everything and it had a deterministic fruit yeah but okay so there's the there
is the physics physiology philosophical argument that you just gave uh and I
don't think there's a good argument against it um and let me just expand a little bit for those catching up uh the
concept of chaos is not just disorder right you can you can there's certain
chaotic systems where you set them into motion with certain initial conditions
and you'll get a result and it's a repeatable result with causes and effects determin from start to finish
however if the system is truly chaotic an arbitrarily small shift from those
initial conditions can produce an infinitely different result at the other
end and so the so what it means is you can't realistically predict a future
based on these starting parameters you give because of how sensitive the future is to those starting parameters so like
a hurricane yeah exactly hurricane it's why you can't really predict weather
Is It Good To Think We Have Free Will?
more than like a week in advance it's get goes completely chaotic so all they can do with the hurricane is give what
the models all say and you pick the middle one and and work it from there but every day you get closer to that the
models converge because you're it's less chaotic so my question back to you which
you've surely gotten this before is okay philosophically you can say what you did
was predetermined but the way we experience life we feel we have free will and isn't
that good enough um no and not only isn't good enough scientifically it's an
awful thing for how life is for lots of people to believe in free will that isn't there because you give somebody a
sense that they had control over how things turned out forget predicting the future it changes
Society it justifies an awful lot well put it put it this way one once you buy
into my deal that there's no free will um and when you look at all the biological stuff going on from like when
you were a single fertilized egg cell and everything thereafter when you look
at all all that stuff there's no that's the beginning right there that just when you were born no no
you yes because that actually has a huge influence on stuff um when you there
there's not a crack anywhere in that edifice in which you could push in something that is completely free of the
last like centuries of Science and how we understand the world to work so
that's great if you buy into that you suddenly realize there's something very wrong in that we
run the world on the notion that it's okay to treat some people way better than average for things they had nothing
to do with and other people we worse than average for things they had nothing to do with and then slather on nonsense
about this being a just World afterward and what getting rid of a notion of Free
Will is about is saying actually that's stuff you had no control over o I had no
idea by not just an academic point is what you're saying to be debated slightest in journals it has very real
Free Will in Big Decisions vs. Small Decisions
consequences in our social cultural fabric hello Star Talk averse Neil
degrass Tyson here your host of the Star Talk podcast I'm here to announce that
we just opened a brand new channel on YouTube called Star Talk Plus and that's
where we're going to bring all kinds of innovative content that doesn't quite fit on our
Flagship Channel but they will involve experiments in what we create what your
reaction might be to what we create and it's going to be our Skunk Works as it
were to borrow a term from Aerospace so I look forward to sharing all of this new content with you and
check it out if you have a chance I get what you're saying and I agree with it
I'm not sure if I'm completely there with the total no free will just being
honest and and so explain to me this all right so here's why I agree with you saying I have a friend of mine Dr Mike
uh had a patient who tried to sell their baby okay and they were a drug addict
they were drug addict so and his these are your friends these are your friends just want to be clear no not not the
drug addi sorry Who Am I who am I
sharing am I sharing a a podcast with here okay so anyway uh you know said to me um yeah
that they could not help doing that and I said you got to be out of your gourd
like what kind of hippie dippy commi liberal crap is that that you're saying
look this person tried to sell their child and and then he gave me all this
information on how drugs hijack the dopaminergic system and how your dorsal
lateral prefrontal cortex and your nucleus accumbens and all this crap comes together and basically you have no
control over what you're doing you you decision tree has been hijacked yes you
are just responding to these things this this Cascade that's happening in your
brain and it's really kind of like a neurosynaptic response to something that says hey go
do this because we need this and you'll do anything so you're agreeing with Robert I thought you started this
I am okay now here's why I that's why I agree because I did all the reading and
it makes perfect sense perfect sense however here's what here's what I want to know what about just your regular
everyday decisions that has nothing to do with this outside force coming in and
hijacking a system of your brain it's just I want vanilla ice cream right now
I just want vanilla ice cream some you know so what's I want pepperoni on my pizza I want pepperon on my pizza
because Robert these are I want to see this movie tonight instead of this other movie right these are the these are the
the the power we have over our lives small small examples that they are all
right this is the power over our lives that gives us this illusion that we have free will and we're perfectly content
thinking that you're saying there's some physiochemical biomolecular thing that makes me choose
strawberry instead of in all tonight yeah which is also saying there's this cultural thing which is
also saying how you were raised and what lullab were sung to you have a neuro
that it's all one of the okay let me let me give you a a sense of this with the
the drug guy um if you happen to make a really stupid rash decision and pick the
wrong womb to spend nine months in and your mother was very stressed during the
pregnancy as a result your brain would develop fewer of those dopamine
neurons and as an adult okay so this an epigenetic thing going on epigenetic exactly a part of the brain called The
frontal cortex has to do with reigning in your like imprudent urges and stuff
by age five yeah your par your mother's socio economic status by age five has
already influenced the rate at which this part of the brain has developed every step thereafter and it's just one
piece leading to another to another okay so something like you pick vanilla instead of strawberry
or what we're caught in there is exactly what you like we're alluding to you sit there you make a decision you have a
moment of intent you're consciously aware of the intent you know what the outcome's likely to be most importantly
you know you don't have to do this there are alternatives and that sure seems like Free Will and that is nothing
nothing to do with free will because the only thing to ask at that point is so
how do you turn out to be the sort of person who would want vanilla over strawberry at that's you know I'm gonna
do Robert next time I'm in an ice cream shop I'm gonna say let me see do I want vanilla no I want Strawberry in that
Quantum Physics & Randomness
then right when they're ready to scoop it I I walk out and say I don't want any ice cream at all and that'll totally
confound your entire Theory no not at all because how do you want to being the sort of person saying screw that with
trying to say this is how I'm gonna show them or whatever I'm gonna show you if you wound up exactly like your parents
there was a certain absence of free will if at some point you said oh my God shoot me if I wind up having anything in
common with my parents I'm going to do just the opposite it's the exact same appen for you and any version of that
you just happen to be someone who decides oh I have a theory what this researcher is up to this psychologist
I'm going to intentionally tell the opposite because I've got authority figure issues or because I'm cranky
today and my underwear is too tight or who knows whatever the impinging what made you who you are at that moment okay
Robert I okay so so first let me just preface all this was saying I completely agree with you and all of my recent
thinking aligns with this and I want to share it with you just so I can hear you say Neil you're you're like right on Q I
want to be able to hear you I need that that encouragement but if this is an hypothesis that is strongly
supported by observations what would have to happen
for you to say I guess my hypothesis is wrong because if anything anybody says
or does you count as evidence in support of your your theory then the theory
isn't testable and if it's not testable you you're accepting everything as evident
oh that he did that I'm right they did the opposite I'm still right you chose a vanilla I'm right if you're right for
everything how am I going to know if you're ever wrong here's how you falsify it show me and at this point like
everyone oh prove to us there's no free will prove to us there's no Easter Bunny prove to us that like there's till you
turn around there's somebody creeping up behind you o they disappear that absence
proed proof of absence that whole deal um by now the onus is on people saying
there's free will and this is what would falsify all of this show me a neuron or
a network of neurons or a brain that just did something and show me that it
did that completely free of its history it wouldn't matter what quantum physics
that happens all the time I mean you have particles popping in and out of existence there's no there's no known
cause for it it just is right yeah this is this is where I get conniptions when
quantum physics is wonderfully relevant to quantum physics it's got squat to do with free will issues because it's like
what this this this physicist at at MIT Max tag Mark is calculated we had ma we're friends with
Max Go on okay he's car 23 orders of magnitude that an indeterminist
subatomic effect would have to scale up to influence the behavior of a molecule
it doesn't very very important I did not know that
that should shut everyone up who's trying to explain Consciousness with quantum physics exactly and the next
because if they find a way where somehow magically it bubbles up what you've just explained is a mechanism for Randomness
for random Behavior not like the moral system you've had since you were in your
diapers and the consistent and even if we went there it's not it's it's random
okay and still it's still not really in our control because it's
random that's not what we're looking for with we're looking for you know you get
somebody's funeral and what do they do is they Trot out their oldest friend who gets to say wow even when we were in
kindergarten they were already like this consistent you're not going to get
consistency like that you're not going to get like a stable moral compass or something out of quantum r Randomness
and every you get Randomness exactly that's not where the issue play best
explanation I've heard ever okay so are you saying neurologically because I'm I'm still
stuck on the vanilla ice cream I mean I appreciate the quantum
physics but I'm I'm trying to figure out I'm trying to figure out yes and no up
and down so are you saying that our brains are ramped up with intention
before we even enter the circumstance to say vanilla or chocolate there is
something happening neurologically that has already put us at that precipice and
then pushes us to that place from stuff that went on a second ago to back when
you were a fetus and everything in between and that's that's exactly it because all you are okay here's here's
my like embroidery this on doilies we we are nothing more than the biology over
which we had no control and it's interactions with environment over which we had no control and that's why we are
who we are like if I go into a supermarket I'm not going to buy cheddar cheese how come because probably because
some of the genetics of my taste buds but also because when my wife and I first got together because I had been a
Does Lack of Free Will Explain Everything?
vegetarian in college and thus all you ate was like large blocks of cheddar cheese because they had not discovered
vegetables yet at that time like this was my and she said oh my God that's a saturated fat that's incredibly bad for
your health and I was changed as a result and what we know is the biology
of it even involves like change the makeup of my gustatory receptors in my
tongue as to what tastes good now all of this stuff all of these pieces come into
place and the challenge winds up being show me that this person would have done the exact same thing if all those if
they had different genes they had a different fetal life if they got raised in a different neighborhood by different parents with different culture all of
that and if they had had a different breakfast this morning and all that stuff and okay I to get this this
compliment from you so here are my recent thoughts okay here we go okay I
because I was following the Free Will argument and I was just wasn't the arguments were just not um enlightening
to me to this this every neuros synaptic firing has a precedent and that you'll
do things that you you will make up the reason afterwards for why you did it but in fact it was predetermined fine okay
you can argue that philosophically why that must be so but I I came to that the
same conclusion differently in a in a more restricted sense I asked myself the
person who is depressed chemically depressed do they
have the free will to not be depressed Absolut let's back up if you look if you
look at if you look at at culture one by one things people have
done in the past have fallen by the by the way of the person
is not accountable okay now an early one of these would have been epilepsy okay the
devil got you you're not it's not your fault let bring the priest okay we got that but if you were I'm old enough
maybe you're old enough the the skidrow bum the drunker every all blame was
placed on that person no okay we find out that alcohol is addictive and when
you're addicted you can't get off of it and there there's a homeless community where circumstance have put them there
and so Society has changed in its response to this okay the people who are
risking their who are depressed and on the brink of suicide we're not saying oh just cheer up no we're saying there's a
neurological problem and they're not in control and the person the instant before they jump off the bridge do they
have the free will to not jump off the bridge and as I went through this mental exercise more and more more of
society ended up folding into this mindset and I got more and more
depressed not depressed angered I got angered by it and you find out what is
it 70% of people in prison grew up below the poverty line so poverty is
correlated with being in prison maybe the problem is poverty not do they have the free will to not have committed a
crime and end up in so so then I thought might this explain everything everything
anybody the bully in the yard do they have the free will the person who wants to invade a country is that their
testosterone we all grew up saying can't have female leaders because they have hormonal shifts and we don't know what
they're going to do mean but men don't but men have testosterone okay and with
testosterone you know violence is our I I I I check this uh at a at an
How Does Society Need to Change?
intersection okay if someone Cuts you off in an intersection if some say you how did you chances are it's a guy okay
with testosterone out of control not in my
neighborhood we got some we got some rough women around here that it is so
the men historically have not been honest about what role testosterone plays in their proclivity to commit
violence for example okay and so so all all of a sudden I I said to myself is
everything in society explainable in this way and then I realized oh my gosh if it is then our
entire moral code has to shift it has to
uh it's not a matter of punishment it's a matter of of of nurturing and
understanding so let me pivot now to you and say if we agree and I think we do
that you're right how does society need to
change massively totally um because when you
think this The Compassion machine has to be put into effect and you're not getting that in conservative politics
right yes exactly but if you're really going to test it you got to see if somebody's
willing to feel compassionate about how Donald Trump became the person who he is because it's the same issue there I mean
if you really this out you mean being the best of the best of the absolute
best how did this happen I don't know I believe I believe God chose
me wow that's scary that's really good
and it blame and Punishment make no sense praise and reward make no sense
meritocracies makes no sense criminal justice makes no sense feeling like you have earned anything makes no sense
hating somebody makes as little sense as hating an earthquake all of that that's the only logical point you can get to
and I've been thinking this way since I was 14 and I can actually function this way about three minutes every other
month because it's incredibly hard yeah because we're but I've done it in some
ways I don't believe when there's a lightning storm that some old woman with no teeth at the edge of the Hamlet
caused it with her witchcraft that easy now I subtracted respons that that the
old days that that was not the case right right exactly and when you and I
Chuck you appeared to be too much of a young for this but Neil when we were both young if if you know when we were
in elementary school um if you had the kids sitting next to you was just not learning how to read and they just
weren't paying attention and you know what the attributions were then this kid they're not motivated maybe they're not
so smart they're lazy they're they just don't pay put in a slow class with the short bus you know EXA and then people
discovered oh there's this biological thing called dyslexia like the
architecture of one layer of your cortex is screwy and as a result you flipped
closed loop letters around and oh just In Our Lifetime we have learned that's
not a lazy kid who we've done that one that one didn't take 300 years of
getting rid of witchburn that one or you know people have figured out in our lifetime who you love is a biological
phenomenon it's not some like oh I had no idea biology had to do with so we're
slowly getting better and at each one of these steps we figured out schizophrenia
is not caused by mothers who unconsciously hate their child autism is
not caused by mothers who are incapable of love oh it's a neurog genetic developmental disorder we figured that
one out and hundreds of thousands of women who spent their whole lives being told by every expert out there that they
they were the cause of their child schizophrenia suddenly oh this isn't
depressing this is liberating every time we've done this it's become a more
Humane place yes yes and and even uh and of course I remembered seeing a
film uh from the 19 early 60s where someone was addicted to drugs
and it was a drama he was addicted to drugs and he said I'm a junkie and I can't stop it but the resolution of that
story was the cops came and arrested him today that's Unthinkable right if
What If You Could Do Anything You Want?
someone says I'm a junkie I can't stop it you don't arrest them you you help them right and that's a compassion wait
what what country are we talking about here exactly what well if you say that
from your men's club where you've had a little bit too much vault then then they send you to a nice
expensive rehab program uh if it's out on a street corner maybe maybe something
different you ever wanted one of your questions on the universe answered we all have questions about the universe
black holes to quazars quantum entanglement wormholes there is no end
to the depths of cosmic curiosity well the entry level of patreon membership
with Star Talk get you just that I think it starts at $5 a month you have access
How Do Change a Culture If There’s No Free Will?
to the question line that reaches our Cosmic query programming and not only
that we produce a special Cosmic queries installment just for patreon
members if you weren't the director of the Hayden planetarium what do you think you would be doing what but this have to
be another Universe it wouldn't happen in this universe okay I'd be I'd be a a song for Broadway musicals o so that's
the entry level and the perks ascend from there uh there's a level in fact
where we send you a an autographed copy of one of my latest books uh right now
it's Star Messenger Cosmic perspectives on civilization and it's signed with my
fancy fountain pen with purple ink so I invite you to just check the link below
and all of that money goes to our ability to experiment with new ways of
bringing the universe down to earth so thank you for those who have already joined and we welcome others to
participate in this Grand Adventure of what it is to bring the universe down to
earth as always keep looking up someone is self-aware that they need help that we don't deny them the help I mean this
is an evolution of our cultural response to people who are not entirely control
of their own fate so you know and I I get it I mean I I don't disagree um I
think as I think I think what scares people is they start thinking about the
consequences of this and because I was just thinking about okay so what about responsibility and what do you do if
people can just do what they want but then it just popped into my head while you guys were talking what if I were
able to do anything I wanted anything if you told me can go out and do anything I
want with Cons with no consequence what would I change and the truth is very
very little I would not go out and kill anybody I would not start doing drugs I
would not start I would I pretty much still be the exact same person I am
right now even if you gave me the ability to do anything that I wanted it wouldn't lead me down this path of and
now I'm just going to become the most decadent most evil bad Boon like person
that I can possibly become I mean like the laws are the only thing preventing you from crime yeah it's not just the
laws it's it's my place in society it's my commitment my commitment to being a
citizen it's it's all these other things that make me me okay so Robert we can
split the kingdom here by saying there are forces that are societal and cultural and then there are forces that
are purely biological and physiological and yes there's overlap I get it but but
if we're going to prevent religious factions from killing each other I
refuse to think that that's biological this is a trained thing from birth where you where your religion is better than
someone else's religion and they're the wrong religion and so this a kind of a brainwashing there in not accepting the
diversity of what exists around us so maybe if we can't change the biology we
can change the culture how far will that get us in a world with no free will um
it's G to make a spectacular place to live in about 600 years it's going to be
long it's a long first off um I'm I'm obliged or I have to give up my my
pedantry license to say oh Neil that's a false dichotomy between culture and bi
it's one and the same like you come from you come your mother was from a
collectivist culture versus an individual no I say there there's overlap there's overlap of course I'm
not denying that but what I'm saying is what has to happen in this world if we cannot change our physiology to make it
safer for us all and more of a Utopia that you have imagined change the educational system let everybody free
from the prison system no of course not of course not you can't have dangerous people running around but we've figured
out ways to deal with dangerous people who are damaging for reasons out of
their control and to protect Society from them here's a great example your
kid is sneezing your kid has a nose cold and what you do is you keep them home
from kindergarten tomorrow because there's a preemptive law please if your guy if your kid has a cold don't send
them to they don't get everybody else sick you quarantine you constrain your child's Behavior but you don't then tell
them that they can't play with their toys that day because they're a rotten person for sneezing you subtract
responsibility out of it and you still can protect and we do that in all sorts
of airline pilot airline pilot is taking anti-histamines because of they're cold
and it makes them a little drowsy you can't work you can't fly for X number of days if you're taking antihistamine we
can build a world in which we protect people from damaging folks and hopefully
along the way recognizing how people became damaging and you while subtracting out responsibility and
moralizing and sermoning at them and because you could see biologically where
things went wrong and you can see where culture comes in okay so like great example the schizophrenia thing people
started figuring out in 1950s scientist that schizophrenia wasn't caused by bad mothering it was caused by
neurochemistry and it had zero impact on Psychiatry and family members of people
it had no impact at all until something amazing happened in the 1980s Phil
Donahue Phil Donahue was the Oprah of the time um who turned out he had a relative with schizophrenia and he
invited on host very yeah um very very
persuasive biological psychiatrist who did something amazing he held up some of
the first brain scans that were just being published at the time showing structurally there's differences in the
brains of people with schizophrenia and but whoa look you can look at the picture of
it and that was the transformative moment so you could say okay so why do
we have a culture where it took someone like Phil Donahue to have us rethink this why do we have a culture where it
takes Caitlyn Jenner appearing on the cover of whatever magazine that was for
people to say oh this transf sometimes people just feel like they're a different sex than what their biology
and that why' we are why' we wind up being that kind of culture why' we wind
up having a culture in which you know certain values are glorified and other
SI culture is exactly the opposite how were you raised depending on what culture is a difference in how many
seconds on the average you would cry before your mother would pick you up were they training you to be tough or
Giving Up Meritocracy
were they training you to feel s and just each time that happened your brain got constructed a little bit differently
and at each one of these steps it goes on like that and how do you like what
makes somebody an ex white supremacist what went into that all of these things
can change and the cultural changes and the biological changes are totally
intertwined and what we're getting at here is like the worst conclusion to come out of this with is oh there's no
free will nothing can change things change enormously you have to do is
understand where the buttons are and where the levers are and where the irrationality is and where the post Haw
rationalizations are to explain something that in fact was a pure gut instinct it makes no sense at all and
had do people get that way and how do you get people that way to stop being that way and just to be clear post Hawk
explanation is you see something happen and you after the fact account for why
it happened without real evidence for what actually caused it and so you have a post Haw accounting and there's
there's been a lot of that in the history of civilization so if I'm hearing you correctly you're kind of saying let's look at these social
ills um and maladies with an eye
towards uh restoration and compassion compass and
and compassion and giv and restoration as opposed to punitive measures only
which is what we do now we just go we're gonna punish you and that's it thr and and and and normally people go to jail
and come out worse criminals better trained right they're trained to become criminal
criminals yeah exactly um and like you can use punishment and you can use
reward as Like Instrumental tools because that's a that's a good way to make organisms change Behavior but the
notion of them being virtues in and of himself are ridiculous and yeah it makes
no sense to hold somebody responsible either for the fact that their
unbelievably awful upbringing resulted in someone with a really impaired capacity for empathy and
feeling somebody else's pain or the fact that somebody's really privileged upbringing produce somebody who gets
really good SAT scores and know how to write a five paragraph essay and get into a prestigious is college like and
both there's no intrinsic virtue in how any of us turned out and there's no
intrinsic earned or entitled and that's hard as hell to
subtract that out and what I've seen is yeah yeah yeah that's really scary in
terms of saying oh what are we we got have criminals running around in the street and what do we do with criminal justice it's going to be a lot harder
Factoring in Accountability
for people like us to instead say oh I actually haven't earned anything with my
work ethic I actually haven't earned anything with my good SAT scores or my
corner office or my amazing Sal it's going to be much harder to undo the
meritocracy end of it because anyone who's sitting and listening to like ridiculous stuff about cosmology and
stuff they're one of the lucky ones they learned how to read they're probably not
homeless they're they're we're the lucky ones and if there being no free will
means bummer my TV maybe isn't as impressive as I used to think it was and doesn't indicate I'm a much better human
than average and we're the ones who we're we're in the subset where we are
treated better than average in society like when they come well I worked hard
for this I worked exactly you you had that roommate who no doubt went out and
got falling down drunk that Saturday night and you studied instead and you earned this and yeah you learn something
different you're brain did gratification postponement differently because of this that and the other thing here's
something I do tell people people say how do you write so many books I my answer is I probably watch less football
than and there and why how' that turn out how I I watch less football than
average because there was one stage where I decided that bullies would like me if I memorized every stupid factoid
about the Green Bay Packers because they were in ascendency at the time and that turned out not to work yeah and that
turned out not to impress them in the slightest they didn't and okay so football is not the route towards like
so like I lost interest in football that's why I don't watch football because like knowing you know Vince
Lombardi and his like Golden Rule or whatever what yeah all of these things
come from somewhere and we turned out who we are and for most people
um we claiming they're responsible for stuffs that didn't turn out very well that they in fact had no control over by
the way I watch football because I have to support anything that keeps what could be murderous barbarians off of the
streets of our country because I don't know if you've seen these guys but they are scary and the fact the fact that we
give them lots of money to you know run into each other instead of us is fine
with me just a a couple of more sort of points to close this out so you would
say then that people might have a susceptibility biophysiological
susceptibility to addiction to joining Cults to belief systems and there's a
certain to working hard in it might not be the right word but a certain
unaccountability to that would that's a fair statement correct yeah and other people wind up
with a proclivity for feeling other people's pain or being able to look past
superficial explanations or reflect on things and respect the process of
reflecting on things and yeah the good sides the bad sides
it's all how we turned out and it's stuff we had no control over okay so
what's if people read your book determined okay just came out a few
months ago do you really think it would take 600 years to reach that I mean if I look at the pace of social cultural
change it's faster than that I would I would like to believe that the depths of
compassion that a society without Free Will promotes is something that would
Do We Have Free Will To Determine Whether We Believe in Free Will?
come to us much sooner than that than 600 years well maybe I'm more pessimistic than you I it's very we
figured out you know witches don't control the weather and it's a bummer to burn old women the Stak yeah
weed out we sorted that one out it was 50 years ago that figured out epilepsy
we figured that out we fig we're kind of figuring out that there's a biology to
obesity and people who have trouble feeling a satiation signal and it's not because they secretly hate themselves
they've got screwy receptors for some satiation hormone and they hypothal and
we're doing that stuff all the time but we got a long way to go with it and you know as I said I think this way
all the time but I can actually act on this for two seconds at a time somebody cuts me off in traffic I think they are
a vile human who deserves to burn in hell someone tells me like o nice
sweater and for a few seconds afterward I think I am intrinsically a better human than average as a result and then
think about it a second time and a fourth time and a tenth time and when you next feel like judging somebody do
that and when you next feel like you earn the right to be at the front of the line for the next vaccine think about it
a second and 10th time as well and baby steps well for those only listening to
this uh podcast Our Guest Robert has a full up Santa Claus beard so I'm trying
to think given your free will hypothesis would you make a good Santa Claus or a
bad Santa Claus what kind of Santa Claus is this
man gonna make uh you know you you you kind of look like smart
Santa you know it's the it's the because because the hair you got to remember
Santa you know you you have the professor hair and the Santa beard so you're you're you're more professorial
Santa all right it's just say Santa says were you were you naughty or nice did you deserve this gift that's right this
would be the worst Santa ever say no you don't have free myp actually now I take it back you're Oprah Santa it's like you
get a gift and you get a gift and you get a gift yes I'm I'm Santa biological
and in fact I don't care because all I care about now is if my parents were still alive they'd be totally irritated
by the fact that I have this beard still that's why I have a beard not because I want to seem like a good Santa or bad
because it irritated the hell out of them in the middle 1970s and sure that work operating on it yeah ex okay so I'm
gonna end on a on a question to you that might Short Circuit your brain and steam
will come out of your ears like every episode of Star Trek where Captain Kirk outsmarts the
computer okay so um if I tell
you that I don't agree with you that we all have free
will then I'm not in control of the fact that I am telling you we all have free
will it's predetermined that I think that everyone who thinks we have free will that we have free will that's
predetermined and there's nothing we can do about it yeah until you get
educated until somebody you can't get out of yeah like somewhere along the way
you figured out the kids sitting next to you having trouble learning to read there's this thing called dyslexia and
you changed you changed as a result and like you're brain changed when you look
at somebody who has like a lot of spelling errors or whatever their writing and like they mentioned
somewhere yeah I got a learning difference whatever a part of your brain that would have had some aversive
responses and told another part of your brain that has something to do with judgment and doesn't activate
anymore learn okay and social Enlightenment turns out to be
neurobiology and neurobiology turns out to be different social behavior it's completely intertwined like thank God we
CH you can cure people who think there's there is Free Will there's yeah it's not their fault we
exactly we pray for their souls but [Laughter]
still all right dude Robert this has been a delight uh this book oh my gosh
um you know some people write books just because they can write a book this one has the power to shift the center mass
of civilization in ways that it's already moving in that direction but maybe too slowly
and with an a deeper understanding that you're providing us all uh perhaps we can achieve this Utopia much sooner than
I don't have to wait another 600 years analogizing today to what to the witch burnings of 600 years ago I'd like to
think we're on a faster track than that let's hope so uh Robert spolski thanks
for being on Star Talk Chuck always good to have you man always a pleasure this is Neil theg grass Tyson Star Talk
this is a an addition on Free Will a long overdue conversation thanks for
[Music] [Applause] [Music]
listening


every person acts acts as though they
believe in Freedom of the will that
includes the people who deny that they
have freedom of the will they act as if
they believe it that's why they present
arguments to try to show that there's no
free will no point in preventing
arguments if if there isn't any if we're
just autom what's the point of
presenting arguments it's just like two
thermostats that are communicating so
they all act 100% of the time as if they
believe they have free will give reasons
and so on well that's Point number one
second question is does science have
anything to tell us about this answer no
nothing uh science can tell us we can
deal with
determinism we can deal with
Randomness but that's it that was true
in the 17th century it's true today so
two points everyone acts 100% of the
time as if they believe we have free
will you can't turn to science because
it tells you nothing about it except
that we can't handle it so that leaves
two
possibilities one is we're all 100%
deluded
we're acting in contrary to the facts
100% of the
time second possibility is there's
something missing in human
science okay take your choice actually
if you don't if you believe there isn't
any choice then you can't take it but
the way everyone acts they can act as if
they have a choice between those
alternatives it doesn't matter much what
the
sophisticated theories tell us this is
essentially what we're left
with and in fact it's if you look at the
scientists who do study voluntary motion
there are good they don't talk about
free will they talk about trivial things
like can I decide to lift my finger or
something and their conclusion
I think maybe we've discussed this I
don't remember but if you go to people
like Edo
V Robert jamian the major scientists who
deal with this they have a
state-ofthe-art
review in the Journal of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences in which
they go through has ever been what's
been learned about
controlling minimal activities eye blink
lifting your finger and then they
say they say as they put it we'll put
this
fancifully and what they say fancifully
is we've been we've come to understand
something about the puppet and the
strings but we have nothing to say about
the Puppeteer yeah it's just a total
mystery
that's where we live so when you talk
about Free Will let's say libertarianism
compatibilism and maybe a hard
incompatibilism how do these approaches
navigate morality this is such an
important topic I think as part of this
Niche should distinguish the questions
of Free Will from the questions of moral
responsib ability those are different
topics I mean they're related but
distinct almost all
the philosophical tendencies that you
just mentioned almost entirely are
concerned with questions of moral
responsibility they're not concerned
with the question of can I decide to
lift my
finger that's the question of freedom of
will there are are cons there are
concerns about if there is no freedom of
will how do we assign moral
responsibility well that's question you
can ask but it's only a meaningful
question for those who think there's no
Free
Will and in my opinion nobody has that
opinion they may say they have it but
they act as if they don't believe it
what I'm I don't really care what I
don't think it's interesting what people
think they believe I think what's
interesting is what they do believe yeah
and what they do believe you can
determine from their actions again it's
a very striking fact that 100% of our
actions including those of people who
claim they don't have free will 100% of
their
actions uh ref NE a belief an
unacknowledged belief that they do have
free will so since that's 100% of human
behavior it's kind of an interesting
question why people deny what they
believe but separate kind of
question and these questions of moral
responsibility do arise if you
acknowledge that you have freedom of
choice uh but that's not the domain in
which the tendencies that you describe
function if we do believe that we have
free will then these questions can arise
quite seriously if we
claim hypothetically that there's no
free will then you get into complicated
philosophical questions but I don't
personally see much point in exploring
them because they're based on a
hypothetical assumption which doesn't
apply it's
an
amusing discussion in your free time if
you have nothing else to devote yourself
to I don't find it very interesting I
mean there is an interesting if you like
metaphysical
question do we have free
will uh well again we're left with what
I said before with we always act
everyone as if we have free will science
tells us nothing about
it
then we can make a choice maybe human
science just has its limits which I
think there's every reason to believe I
think we are organisms We're Not Angels
if we're organisms we are like other
organisms
every single one has scope and limits
and that's true for all of our
capacities as
well uh people question that only for
our mental capacities I don't see why
those should be different from any other
capacity in the case of every other
organism their cognitive capacities has
scope and limits in the case of
humans metaphoric speaking below the
neck you know meaning we everyone agrees
yes we have scope and limits there are
those who claim and effect it's a huge
number maybe most philosopher that up
here something escapes the natural world
it's a kind of methodological
dualism which I see no reason to accept
seems to be much more pernicious than
traditional metaphysical dualis
which was in fact normal science take a
look at De it was simply normal science
said he could tried to argue that
everything in the world has a mechanical
explanation including most things about
human beings but then he noticed
correctly in fact that there are certain
aspects of ordinary human life which
don't have a mechanical interpretation
for me particularly interesting is that
one of the main ones in the discourse is
just what you and I are now doing the
ability to carry out normal conversation
with
others
creative making up new Expressions new
thoughts maybe never occurred in the
history of the world and able to allow
others to uh comp apprehend the inner
workings of our minds by means of verbal
communication he argued that that's
beyond the bounds of
mechanical
uh explanation and therefore like any
good scientist postulated a new
principle in his metaphysics a new
substance race K well turned out he was
wrong turns out there isn't a mechanical
explanation for for anything so in
particular not for normal verbal
interaction well that left us that's
Newton basically show there's no
mechanical explanations for anything in
the world uh he regarded that as a
complete absurdity but but he was stuck
with it then very quickly within a
couple of years in fact Came John Lock
who said yes Mr Newton has demonstrated
to us that the what we call the material
world has properties we can't comprehend
we're just it's just a fact so
maybe organized matter whatever old
matter turns out to be has the property
of generating
thought yeah that's I think the answer
to the question don't think it's been
improved on since so that's what we're
left with we have scope and limits like
everything else in the organic world and
it may be that the explanation for the
freedom of will that all of us act as if
we believe we have maybe it's just
beyond human cognitive capacities if so
it wouldn't be unique
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]


now you've uh already alluded to this
this time in a 14-year-old Robert sosi's
life when he's he's thinking deeply
about uh religion he's also thinking
about free will now what is happening in
a young Robert zap's life at this time
that forms his opinion on free will oh I
was having a very very personal
religious crisis uh built
around something over which I had no
control which was very very
adversely affecting my quality of life
and a something with which within the
religious framework in which I was being
raised um I would be judged negatively
by God
for and this
seemed like
Beyond incompatible and impossible and
wait a sec you create the world
including my being this way that I am
and wait now I get judged harshly by you
because of that how screwed is that wait
how do I reconcile and you know waking
up literally one night at two in the
morning as a 14-year-old saying oh I get
it there is no God and there is no Free
Will and we're just biological machines
and like that religious crisis
evaporated the world has seemed like a
depressing place ever since but at least
that took care of that problem so yeah
that was mired in you know there's a
whole world of people who
Stop Believing in Gods and people who
Stop Believing in Free Will out of just
reasoning your way through the
absurdity of those unfalsifiable belief
systems in my case it was purely
emotional this like just feels intoler
able that this could be what the world
is like if this is the contradiction
that I've arrived at
here so last week I was watching a lot
of um the debates and conversations
you've had um with people on on the
subject of Free Will and I stumbled
across this article that someone um
called the spolski Paradox which I'd
like to put to you here today um so the
the spolski Paradox then um in the if
you decide Free Will does not exist by
weighing up the arguments for and
against it you prove it exists if you
read or listen to an argument that it
doesn't exist and then agree with that
then you are literally exercising Free
Will how would you respond to the
argument that any choice resulting from
uh conscious deliberation demonstrates
Free
Will well not surprisingly I think
there's no Paradox at all
um you know my stance I'm way way out in
The Lunatic Fringe of sort of
neuroscientists and sort of radical
materialists and that I think there's no
free will whatsoever um I think it is
simply not how life Works um but why is
there no Paradox with it because one is
getting suckered in by the most tempting
Mis step to take when considering that
we have no free will which is dealing
with like this abundantly clear fact
that we change things
change our behaviors change cultures
change society's change and the world is
full of not enough of them but at least
some ex white supremacist neo-nazis who
changed you know like change happens
change happens and where people then
believe they have hit this wall of
compatibility with thinking there's no
free will is the notion that you have
chosen to
change none of us choose to change we
are changed by
circumstance and this the change that
any circumstance evokes in US is a
function of who we turned out to be when
we experience that
circumstance and when you frame it that
way that's exactly what occurs change
happens but not because we choose to do
so you know you get two people they go
into a movie theater and watch this
movie some like wonderfully
inspirational movie I don't know Gandhi
or who knows what and they both come out
of the experience changed they are both
changed they do life differently
afterward they form different intents
and act upon them than they did before
the movie one of them comes out and says
that's the most inspiring thing I've
ever seen I'm going to like give up my
worldly possessions tomorrow and the
other person comes out and says that's
the most amazing cinematography I've
ever seen I'm going to quit my job
tomorrow and study at the feed of the
cinematographer wow you've been changed
you've been you changed you didn't
choose to change You've Been Changed by
the circumstance and these were not
remotely the equivalent people similar
people going in there whatever it is
that made them who they were which is to
say their lifetime of biology over which
they had no control and his interaction
with environment over which they had no
control determines how you were going to
respond to this external
factor and where things get
particularly seductively complicated for
people saying oh there's got to be free
will just look at how we do this or that
is when you then come out of there and
you say something like wow I had no idea
that's what went on in India's
Liberation from the British Empire or
whatever I knew nothing about I'm gonna
go read up more on this I'm going to
acquire more information about that whoa
free will I'm going to go read up more
on this how did you become someone who
values reading how did you become
someone privileged enough in society
that you're not working three jobs and
you can actually go and read stuff how
did you become lucky enough that you're
in a society that has things like books
etc etc no all that you have done there
is you have
learned you know not only are we like
every other species out there biological
machines we're the only ones who could
learn something about where the button
and the levers are and you have just
learned you did not choose to learn but
you have just learned by your pride or
experience with reading and efficacy and
who knows what that this is something
you could now do to reinforce what it is
you came out of that movie
thinking I mean that's what we're doing
every single time when we say oh my God
I'm not going to watch the news for two
weeks because it's so upsetting you
understand the wiring somewhere in there
that like finding out what's going on in
this or that corner of the world or this
or that corner of the American political
landscape you have that's one of the
buttons that's one of the connections
and then it'll depend on if you turned
out to be the sort of person who could
stick with that resolution in all these
cases you can change and you can become
the Catalyst for your changing further
and you can actively become a catalyst
for other people Chang in around you all
because you were changed and as a
function of who you turned out to be
over which you had no control all of
that is completely compatible with there
being no Free Will at all


Sapolsky’s case against free will
Robert spolski welcome to within reason thanks for having me on so on a scale of 1 to 10 just how
bored are you of people making jokes about free will to the effect of whenever you do anything they say hey
it's not your fault you couldn't help it oh I don't know I've been telling people for a long long time that I don't think
there's any free will so I've been hearing that as a as a response for a long time so by now it has sort of a
Sentimental Nostalgia so that's good sure well I mean although what we're
talking about today really isn't any kind of joke I I can understand why to somebody who hasn't really thought about it before that much it might sound like
one I mean the the your most recent book determined uh is essentially an attack a
philosophical attack on what might be considered one of the most fundamental
elements of of being a human of being alive of being a conscious agent and that is our ability to make choices it's
something that I've spoken about on uh on my YouTube channel before so I think that people listening will probably have
a vague idea of the argument surrounding the the existence or non-existence of free will but your book kind of takes
two parts there's the part one here's here's the bad news and then there's the part two of here's what we can do about
it or here's how we might respond to this realization that there is no Freedom so I think it would be worth
going over the first part just a little bit because everybody has a slightly different approach to arguing why there is no free will there are lots of
different ways to do it uh but hopefully we can jump into the second part fairly quickly so you can make an argument
against Free Will from from you Neuroscience from from physics about particles bumping into each other from
just abstract philosophy about the way that thinking Works what approach do you take and uh and why well I am pitifully
unschooled in both philosophy and physics so I'm coming at it from my profession which is I'm a biologist um
I'm mostly a neuroscientist but the fact that I'm not entirely one I think is very pertinent um to all of this because
what I spend my time thinking about is when a human a primate when somebody
does a behavior we ask why' they do that where did that come from why did that just occur and what is scientifically
sort of clear to me by now is that's a whole hierarchy of questions why did that occur you're asking which parts of
the brain did or didn't do something in the last half second but you're also
asking something about the sensory stimuli for that individual in the prior
minutes were they terrified were they stressed were they aroused were they hungry sleepy whatever because that's
going to affect how your brain is responding to stuff but you're also asking what about your hormone levels
this morning because that's going to have been shaping how sensitive your
brain was to various environmental stimuli what were your last years like and in terms of trauma finding love
finding God whatever because as the backbone of this whole field neuroplasticity you will get major
changes in brain function and structure in response to experience like that and then you're off to your usual suspects
adolescence childhood fetal life your genes amazingly you also have to
consider what kind of culture your ancestors came up with parentheses what kind of ecosystems they were living in
because that had a ton to do with it what does that have to do with any of this because within minutes of birth the
culture in which your mother was raised will influence her mothering style and you so why did that person just do what
they did because of everything from one second ago to Millennia ago all of these
influences and when you look at them there's two key punch lines the
first one is when you look at sort of the amount of our Behavior that all of
those prior events Encompass what you conclude is we are nothing more than the
sum of our biological luck over which we had no control and its interactions with
the sum of our environmental luck which we also had no control over um the
second key point with that which really does in Free Will for me is it's not a
punchline here of oh you got to keep in mind a whole bunch of different science ific disciplines because maybe
Neuroscience doesn't disprove free will but Endocrinology does or that doesn't
disprove but genetics or or physiological ecology or any no the key
point is all of these different disciplinary approaches turn into the same thing what do I mean by that you're
talking about genes and behavior if you're doing that by definition you're
talking about millions of years of evolution of your genes and you're also
talking about what your childhood was like when experiences then were causing lifelong epigenetic changes in your Gene
regulation and you're also talking about what proteins your brain were making on the direction of your genes 25 minutes
ago and when you look at how it forms this one continuous Arc of
influences my two sents is there's not a crack anywhere in that edifice in which
you could shoot born in free will tell me about the hungry judge
Why you never want a hungry judge
phenomenon oh I love this one this this one is is in the realm of like what's
been going on in the previous hours and this was this classic study published in
a very prestigious Journal looking at all of the parole board decisions that
were made in a particular country over the course of a year and hundreds and
hundreds possibly thousands I'm forgetting and you know at each juncture a judge either let somebody go free or
sent them back to jail and the scientists looking for what were their predictors of the decision and they
found like the single most powerful one was how many hours it had been since the
judge had eaten a meal see a judge right after they had lunch you had about a 60%
chance of parole by 3 4 hours later essentially a 0% chance whoa what is
that about that's totally bizarre that makes total biological sense because
like the part of your brain that is required to think about the world from
somebody else's perspective to challenge your immediate snap judgments a second
time a fifth time a tenth time it's part of the brain the frontal cortex is the most expensive part of your brain
metabolically when it's been hours since you've eaten your blood sugar levels are low and what's one of the first parts of
the brain that's beginning to get a little sluggish as a response this part of the brain and it's easier to default
into a quick snap judgment and you know the the neurom metabolism of that
occurring is like pretty straightforward what's astounding to me is the knowledge that you take any one of those judges
and say whoa this is interesting remember back right after lunch you had a guy who had done X and you red him and
just now this person seemed to have done the exact same thing but you sent him back to jail what's the deal with that
they're not going to say because my frontal metabolism decreased they're going to site right some college course
on emanu k or something that will fill in an attribution when it's metabolic
okay it must be said that study got a lot of attention and it got a few
different groups challenging its statistics its interpretation it is totally Lally held up solid and has been
effect replicated you do not want to ask for a home mortgage loan at the bank if
it's been hours since the person you're talking to is eating the meal all sorts of versions like that when people are
hungry when they're sleep deprived they become less generous they become less
Cooperative they're more likely to stab you in the back if you're playing an economic game with them so just on that
level wow when you had lunch is going to have a major impact on whether or not
like you're going to send this person back to jail or not yeah there's Machinery humming underneath the surface
all the time and this when you say this is the biggest predictor of the parole
decision that the judge makes is this bigger than political affiliation bigger
than the the the kind of schooling that the judge has this is really the biggest factor that we can use to determine or
or to take a guess at what their decision is going to be well it's after controlling for like The Logical
modulators what is the person from the same in group that you are what's your
who appointed you things of that sort um it was it was a Middle Eastern country
so some some specifics to their sort of Criminal Justice System but yeah of the
extraneous this couldn't possibly have something to do with how judges make their decisions list this was at the top
of the list um fasc fascinating because well especially because most
people intuitively know this to some degree right if you're having an argument with somebody you might think
to yourself gosh maybe I'm just hungry or hangry maybe I'm tired you say well let's revisit this in the morning I need
to sleep on it you people are already aware that to to some degree there are
Do we have any free will?
moments in our lives where uh the decisions that we make seem to be out of
accord with with our own agency so when asking you know whether we have free will everybody's going to agree that
there are certain circumstances where we have less free will or more free will
there are certain times when our Free Will is diminished and I suppose when the question is asked well where do we
draw the line as to how far that that can go how far that Free Will can be removed your answer seems to be that
there is no line yeah these are these are nice liberal reformist edge cases oh we all
have free will but some of the time all of us have less than it other times and some people really have way less than
other people my my stance and I'm way out in The Lunatic Fringe on this in
terms of sort of neurosciences Stephen is that there's no free will whatsoever
um that there's all sorts of points where we think we're seeing it um
because we're looking in the wrong place we're having a very strong emotional pull towards seeing it but that there
actually is none whatsoever when you look at the you know
the you know cumulative ways in which you turned out
to be who you are and how what came before determined that there there is
none that's all we are we are the outcome of the biological environmental luck that started way back when up to a
second go and there's no me inside there
inside your brain that's in your brain but not of your brain and it's made of something separate and that somehow is
immune to things like your blood glucose levels or your genes or what culture you
were brought up in or whether you're worrying about paying the month's rent and that's like the main thing on your
mind that that's there is no separate me in there now people are going to want to
separate out the micro from the macro here you know they they're going to want to say okay if it gets cold that will be
a determining factor in me putting my coat on I'll go go and put a jacket on and clearly you know that's somewhat out
of my control cuz I don't control the temperature but that's not going to determine whether I put my left arm through first or my right arm through
first you know like those minute decisions that seem to be almost trivial it's almost as if even if you went
looking for some kind of determinant Factor as to why you the left arm rather than the right arm it seems it seems
ridiculous to say that that decision might have something to do with you know your ancestors or or or the the how
recently you ate or any of these kinds of factors so what's a good way of explaining the the loss of agency in the
in the minute decisions like that where there doesn't seem to be even to the person a sort of uh a rational or an
obvious non-rational reason for for one or the other well let's let's unpack
that a bit um so you get some college freshmen who has volunteered for a psych
experiment and they show up and the experiment is here's a button and
whenever you feel like it push it and you can push it with your right hand or your left hand and just go for it um and
thus we're in this Micro World so first off oh is this person left-handed or
right-handed that's a biological phenomenon does this person happen to have a sore shoulder on their right side
not their left whatever it is so that but then you're sitting there and this
is a psych experiment you're wondering oh what do they really want to know about this you start generating a
hypothesis what is it that they're looking for you're having a metal level of you're saying well I just did my left
hand three times in a row is that indicative okay let me do right next
time then you're wondering if you saw and you thought you saw like a micro expression of a smile on the
researcher's face that aha their theory was just are you a jerk at that point saying okay I know what they're up to
I'm going to do just the opposite what how do you turn out to be first off the
sort of person who would be in University and sign up for a psych experiment and the sort of person who
would show up on time and how do you be the sort of person who was or wasn't generating hypotheses as to what are
they looking for here and do I want to confirm that do they do they are they appealing am I going to try to do what I
think they want me to do or am I going to do the opposite because I'd like to show them that I'm smarter than they are
because my authority issues and like just unpacking even something as like
trivial as that is going to have a little bit of this
viscosity uh coming from everything that came before that made you
you well people often like to ask me about uh there's a French philosopher whose name I I don't know if I pronounce
correctly um but this concept of Buran is it burdan burdan uh but his donkey or
his ass and this this idea of a of a donkey stood behind two two hay stacks
and uh it's hungry and it needs to eat from one or the other but but because the donkey has literally no reason to
pick one Hast stack over the other it stands in the middle and ends up starving to death because any reason to
go for one or the other doesn't materialize and yet to go for one or the other you need some reason and I had a I
had someone ask me about this recently I was I was speaking at a school and this this young guy comes up to me and he
asks me about this this situation and the way that I tried to explain it to him was to say the two options you have
is that are that either there is some determining factor that makes the donkey go for for stack a or stack b or there's
literally no determining Factor now granting that the donkey probably does something right so let's say it goes for
stack a if there was some determining Factor then that's what we're talking about here you have to ask what BR
brought about that determining factor and it's probably outside of the donkey's control but if even if it were the case that there really were zero
determining factor and the donkey genuinely randomly picks stack a the
definition of Randomness entails that you're not in control of that either a lot of people
like to think that the place you can shoe horn in Free Will is as as you say is by looking towards elements of
Randomness in the universe perhaps at the quantum level but often times I think forgetting that Randomness means
that there's no determining factor which means that you can't be the determining Factor so that must be outside of your control too but I wonder how you would
account for this situation of the donkey between the two haacks and and what might be going on in his in his mind
well Randomness is a very tricky thing in all this first off is the like holy
grail or like deepest hole into purgatory of any of this which is
quantum indeterminacy and does that actually mean the whole universe is indeterministic and is there a way to
harness indeterminacy to get like Free Will and all and in the book I spent two
chapters on this that um essentially Quantum indeterminacy has nothing to do with any of this for three reasons the
first is the subatomic scale it's so many orders of magnitude that
these effects would have to Bubble upward and in such synchrony among all
the different subatomic events going on in one molecule at a time let alone one
region of the brain that it's beyond impossible for that to occur the second
one is exactly what you allude to which is if by some chance it did bubble all the way up to affect the function of a
neuron or a part of the brain or whatever as you say it's a prescription for
Randomness and God help you if say you're attributing say your moral philosophy to
Randomness and every free will believer and Free Will skeptic um except for a
weird sort of subgroup there agree that Randomness is not like the basis for
free will it's just as incompatible as as extreme determinism the third one is
then this sort of desperate hail Mar that people often grab for at that point which is somehow to harness that
Randomness in some way higher level brain function the the you that's
supposedly separate in there in some way is able to reach down a form of downward
causality that philosophers basically think can't exist in order to opportune
that Randomness for your own like Free Will pleasure and stuff and there's no mechanism for it that works that said
when you look at the brain neurons do random things neurons will randomly dump
little packets of neurotransmitters neurons will randomly
have action potentials now and then and you ask the same question is this like
the fodder for your like moral philosophy kind of thing very unlikely
and the randomness turns out not to be all that random um for example so you got you
know neurons they they talk to other neurons by way of these little fibrous end things called axon terminals that
have little packets of neurotransmitters in them and when the first neuron gets excited it dumps those neurotransmitter
pack it out into the space which floats over to the next neuron and gets it excited and occasionally you see neurons
that will just spontaneously dump their neurotrans transmitters out of their little packets whoa Randomness all of
that Randomness as in well there's the usual machinery for dumping
neurotransmitter when you want to and it's incredibly complicated and it's produced a couple of Nobel prizes so
like something somebody is not looking at the control panel when they should be
inside that neuron and like something slips by and you accidentally activate the dump the neurotransmitter mechanism
oh it's just a hiccup in the system no it turns out spontaneous
neurotransmitter release has a completely different mechanistic pathway for doing it you evolved a capacity for
spontaneous release and then you look more closely and it turns out there's
certain times when these random events occur in your brain more often than others different physiological States
all in other words there are points where your brain determines it's time to be indeterministic for a
bit that sure is not free will that that's that's as much free will as like
you take a an improv theater class and you sit there and the teacher tells you
okay so now we're going to start this scene go for it that teacher has determined that you are going to be
indeterministic now along some parameters even looking at that level there there's no actual Randomness
happening there and there's no means by which true Randomness is the way in which you turn out to be you know a
fundamentalist Baptist or a Tibetan Buddhist or a neolist or whatever it's
just not the building blocks that you can use to generate
that so no Freedom no agency no ultimate control over our actions that's the
situation we find ourselves in and uh I want to talk about how we should react to this but but just beforehand one one
more example who's who's this guy that got the the pole through his through his skull and it and it and it totally
The man with the hole in his head
changed his behavioral traits fin Phineas gauge Phineas gauge every neuroscientist while they're still in
the crib is forced to hear the story of Phineas Gage because it's it's like it's
it's Ground Zero for neuroscientists having something useful to say about Free Will 1840s Phineas Gage was working
on a railroad construction line somebody screwed up something with some dynamite
and did what they weren't supposed to do and it blew a three foot long 13B metal
rod when it exploded into Gage's eye and out the top of his head his forehead and
in the process Landing 13 feet over from there in the process it also took out
his frontal cortex which was like nicely splattered all over the the acreage
there so Gage just had it went it went all the way through and came out came out the other side yes yes and if you
ever find yourself at uh Harvard's medical school and go into their Library
they have Phineas gages skull is on display there and you could see the entry point and the exit point and the
pole that's on display there also um so
Gage gets up which is in and of itself this thing went through at sufficiently
high speed that it cauterized every blood vessel and like he stands there
and he and some of his construction crew compatriots go into town where a doctor
looks and you know looks in the empty space there and diagnoses things saying you you have a hole in your brain there
and as epically described as Gage was no longer Gage he had a massive transformation in
his personality he was the foreman of this railroad of this railroad construction crew he was the sober
God-fearing Church attending sobrius reliable self-disciplined guy and
overnight literally overnight he was turned into this foul mouth profane
disinhibited guy who wasn't able to work for years and years afterward Gage was
no longer Gage um and this was the first very unsettle example that M material
stuff inside your head is essential to what makes us us and you know gagee is a
simple case wow here's Gage who like two years later is cursing loudly in church
blaspheming all of that why did he do that it's easy to see because there was
a metal rods worth of explanation because of that accident that happened to him that's why that one's easy for us
to look at and say oh you know he had no control over that that this part of the brain is it was damaged where we really
have trouble is not when it is something as much of a sledgehammer as a metal rod
but having to deal with the fact that who each of us are why did each of us just do what we did sitting there in
church or in any such why because of a million zil ion gazillion microsc
microscopic little threads from the past that sculpted us into who we are and the
thing is it's easy to see the single Sledgehammer that made gauge gauge and
it's so much harder for us to accept that you put all those zillion microscopic threads of your past
together and it is going to be as powerful as a as a metal rod blasting
through your head it's just harder to see distributed causality a lot of it we
don't even know about yet how it works a lot of it is just probabilistic a lot of but put all those threads together
and there's nothing but the conclusion that you were nothing more than
everything that came before that turned you into the sort of person that you are right now and sometimes it's easy to see
how that happened a metal rod childhood poverty trauma whatever being an
enormous privilege and sometimes it's these little threads going back to like
your hunter gatherer ancestors inventing their culture versus your agriculturalist ancestors and everything
in between yeah I mean we know that that the the environment of our distant
How your ancestors determined who you are
ancestors can affect our behavioral traits today I mean you can you can predict there are studies to show this
if I'm not mistaken You can predict how somebody will behave in a given scenario based on uh the kind of environment that
their ancestors thousands of years ago were living in absolutely you see contrasts between say child rearing
practices in collectivist versus individualist cultures you see completely different attitudes toward
social Norm violations in people who were raised in cultures of Honor
cultures of honor your ancestors were cow people or camel people or goat
people people nomadic pastoralists where if somebody affronts you you come back
and you flatten them with 10 times the retribution because if they take your camel today and you do nothing about it
tomorrow they're going to take the rest of your camels and your children as well or something and you see different
physiology in people in raised in cultures of Honor going back Generations
the last time that was relevant to how their folks were making a living and that leaves imprints people people from
rainforest cultures are far more likely to invent polytheistic religions people
from deserts are more likely than chance to invent monotheistic so whoa that's
part of it as well yeah mothers who grew up in collectivist cultures typically
Southeast Asian rice growing regions versus individualist culture mothers
typically United States sort of the poster child for that on the average they sing l
at different volumes individualist culture mothers on the average sing lullab more loudly than
collectivist on the average they wait a longer time to pick up their kid when their kid's crying than collectivist
mothers at what age is the kid weaned at what age is the kid sleeping alone all
whoo from minutes after birth like that's already beginning to shape how
your brain's being constructed so you put all those pieces together and this
kind of TAPS into the domain where I think people make their most fundamental
most intuitive uh mistaken perception of Free Will which is we make choices we sit in
some split in the road and we form an intent to do X instead of Y we form that
intent we know that we have that intent we know what the outcome of that is likely to be most importantly we know
nobody's forcing us to do that we've got Alternatives available to us and for
most people who think about Free Will and people in the criminal justice system who think about free will is if
you had a conscious intent and you knew what the outcome was likely to be and you knew you didn't have to do it that's
it Case Closed culpability responsibility we're done with our trial and for me um This is 40 Years of people
fighting about the neurobiology of the milliseconds of intent it has nothing
whatsoever to do with the Free Will debate because it doesn't ask the only question you can ask at that point which
is oh yeah how do you become the sort of person who would have that intent at
that moment and you became that sort of person because of what was happening in
your neurons a second ago and what was happening a year ago and what your ancestors and everything in between and
simply looking at from the moment you form an intent and then consciously choose to
act on it is like trying to figure out what a book is about by only reading the last sentence of the entire book all the
important stuff is coming be how did you become that sort of person and you
became that sort of person because biological and environmental factors which collectively you had no control
over and that's why you became you now crucially um when we spoke about the
Is it a bad thing that there’s no free will?
the guge example with the pole through his head and he shows up and and suddenly he is quite a nasty person by
by all accounts I think people would intuitively look at him and say well okay yeah he's he's turned into you know
a bit of a jerk but it's not his fault there there's kind of a sense in which you might feel sorry for him because
even though yeah he might say profane things about the God that you believe in now and that he seemingly believed in at
least yesterday uh look you know he had a pole through his head so led him off
now if you're right that all human behavior is a result of a similarly
uh sort of a process that's similar in the sense
that you don't have control over it then this leads to quite a radical conclusion
that we should probably adopt the same approach to essentially anybody doing anything any of the the time is is that
your position um exactly that's the only logical extension it's the only
intellectually honest and ethically honest conclusion to reach which is this
completely nutty stance that blame and Punishment as virtues in and of
themselves rather than as instrumental tools blame and Punishment never make
any sense whatsoever in any realm of human life and holding a mirror up to
that likewise praise and reward never make any sense whatsoever because it is
that's a circumstance in which some people are treated better than average for reasons they had nothing to do with
as opposed to the world of people being treated worse than average for reasons that blame punishment reward praise a
sense of entitlement a sense that you have earned anything a sense that hating a person is ever Justified
none of those make any sense whatsoever and in principle you need to run the world
without any of that stuff which uh ain't a trivial task to take
on now it it sounds really nice when framed in terms of look if something
goes wrong for you it's not exactly your fault um if if somebody you know has
things better in life it it's you know we should take an egalitarian approach to recognizing that it's not necessarily
due to Merit but we should be sort of uh considerate of the fact that that you know there go I were for the grace of
God um however you can also frame it in terms of saying that you know when I
achieve something when I win a competition when I'm nice to someone in the street there's no sense in which I should be able to feel proud of myself
if that's the case and on a deeper level getting of agency doesn't just get rid
of this ability to feel I suppose uh you proud or to condemn other people morally
speaking it it removes part of what I think many people think it means to be human and so I get a lot of emails from
people saying look uh it's really interesting the stuff about Free Will you've convinced me that there's no free will but I don't really know what to do
now and I never quite know what to say to them and I imagine that you're in a similar
situation where you know you're kind of ask in in a broad
sense does this kind of position just lead to a sort of nihilism and if it
does you know should it yeah now we're getting into sort of
the really problematic stuff because as you described you tell somebody there's
no free will and you manage to sound convincing with that and um even before the nihilism existential void the the
usual reflexive stuff is oh my God you can't tell people that they'll run a muck there's a whole science as to why
that is very unlikely to happen oh my God we'll have no societal mechanisms to keep murderers off the street that's
absurd over and over and over we are able to protect Society from dangering
circumstances and subtract responsibility out in the process oh my
God where if you get rid of meritocracies you get a brain tumor and they're going to pick a random person off the street to do the brain surgery
on you same thing no we can subtract praise and entitlement and meritocracy
and still protect Society from incompetent people doing important stuff
oh my God are you saying nothing can ever change not in the slightest the whole universe of how change works
completely compatible with there being no free will so you get through all of those sources of panic and then there's
the oh my God the the the existential void are you telling me that like the
ways in which I have worked hard I've earned nothing from them that had
nothing to do with me are you telling me I I love my wife we've been married for
34 years now to 2024 that's right 34 and nonetheless sitting there saying oh my
god do I love her in part because of the type of oxytocin receptor genes I have
because of her pheromones or things like that what what does that do to love what does that do to accomplishment what does
that do to any of this stuff if you're a kind person do you actually deserve no
praise for that and yeah that's where the the neologistic void suddenly
beckons and it's you know potentially you know depressing as hell and what
took me forever to figure out is that that's not at the end of the day a
problem or a problem on the scale of the whole world you're bummed out because if
there's no free will you didn't deserve your prestigious University degree you
didn't deserve your excellent salary you're a corner office you didn't
deserve the fact that people love you and respect you you didn't deserve the fact that you were able to help people
and out of kindness you didn't deserve any of the praise for that any of the sense of entitlement all of that bummer
bummer and my critical point there is if that's the stuff that there being no
free will means to you you're one of the lucky humans because you're trying to
figure out what it means that you may not deserve to be the CEO of your corporation or you may not really have
earned love by being a kind person or any of those if that's your problem
you're one of the lucky ones for the vast majority of people on this planet the issue isn't oh my God maybe I don't
deserve to have been treated better than average because I really wasn't responsible for the things that I'm like
treated well for for most people the problem is that we have a world in which we're perfectly happy to treat people
worse than average for reasons they had no control over and for most people like
getting rid of Free Will is a wonderful thing it makes World more Humane here
one example that is like so obvious that it's hard to frame in terms of the Free
Will issue but like at some point 400 years ago most western cultures figured
out that people don't have the free will don't have the power to control the
weather and as such if there's a horrible thunderstorm that destroys everyone's crops it wasn't caused by the
old lady with no teeth at the edge of the Hamlet that nobody talks to Witchcraft doesn't work you can't do
witchcraft to control the weather they don't have responsibility over that and as a result there was a change in how we
did criminal justice you don't burn old ladies at the stake anymore when the weather turns bad because they didn't
actually have control over that and it's a much better world that we don't burn
people at the stake now when the weather turns bad it's a much better world that we figured out about two centuries ago
that an epileptic seizure is a neurological disorder it's not a sign that somebody is demonically possessed
it's a much better world that in the last 40 years or so we figured out that say
schizophrenia is a neurogenetic disorder rather than it is caused by
psychodynamically toxic mothers who secretly hated their child and made them schizophrenic it's a great thing we
figured out that like some kids have trouble learning to read not because they're lazy or unsmart but they have
like architectural abnormalities in one part of their cortex and they tend to reverse letters they have dyslexia it's
a much better World in all those places that we have subtracted a perception of
Free Will out where there is none and becomes a much nicer place to live
in and all we have to do is push harder against the next version of that the
fact that if you get a certain variant of the gene coding for the leptin
receptor in your brain no matter how self-disciplined you are no matter how
much you actually love yourself or any no matter what you do you're going to be overweight because your brain doesn't
get satiation signals and when you look at sort of implicit biases in society
these days one of the only ones that has grown stronger in recent decades is implicit bias against people who are
overweight because we associated with lack of self-discipline and self-indulgence and they secretly don't
love themselves and all and you get that Gene variant and you're screwed you
can't do anything about it and it's going to be a much better world when we
subtract Free Will out of that one all that's going to happen is while a subset
of us and I bet it's the subset of people who are like have the you know
privilege and and opportunity to be interested in subjects like this and thus listen to something like this um
but for most people who are not worrying about the moral relevance of their like
egregiously large salary for most people every single time we have subtracted
Free Will out of our views of why people do what they do the world has become a more Humane place it's great
news I can see that being the case when we remove agency from the weather we remove agency
from you know certain kinds of of performance at school or this kind of
thing but when we remove agency from the movement of the legs to get one out of
bed in the morning when we remove the agency from you know the decision to get
up and go outside and get some sun on your face versus the decision to to lay around in in your bed all day now I I I
don't know what the research shows um if it's conclusive on what kind of effect
uh the disbelief in free will actually has on on human behavior but a lot of people seem to predict that they're
going to become less likely to make that decision to get out of bed and go and get some sun on their face just because
they've become aware that if they did make that decision it wouldn't really be them that's you know in in the driver's
seat so I think it sounds great up to a point now given the fact that we both believe
that this is true that there actually is no agency there you know there's no option for us to just sort of stop at
the nice bit to say look how look at all these sort of great societal motions that we've made and look at some more
that we could make such as you know dealing with obesity but we have to keep
going and we have to sort of get into the sludge and it seems much easier much more difficult for me to me to to paint
this kind of thing in in such a positive light it's incredibly hard um and all
that said I've I was 14 when I stopped believing in Free Will and for more than
half a century since I've thought blame and Punishment and reort and praise and none of that stuff makes any sense
whatsoever and I totally utterly am at intellectual peace with that and despite
that I can actually act on those beliefs for about three minutes once every other month or so because this stuff's
incredibly like somebody cuts me off of traffic and I like hate their guts and think they're a rotten foul human who
should go to hell or at least for a few or someone says to me you know nice
lecture did just now and unavoidably for a few minutes afterward I'm going to feel like I'm a better human than
average because of that and thus deserve to get thus deserve to get to the front of the line for the next great vaccine
that comes along yeah it's incredibly hard and you got to like over and over come back and
say how did this person become who they are and what are the ways in which I can't understand that in the slightest
what are the ways in which I'm feeling entitled where when you look at it closely it's right yeah you got to do
the hard work with it amid that though a gigantic problem which I cannot see
easily solved is the one of motivation of ambition and drive and all of that we
can protect people from damaging individuals
without invoking Free Will and all sorts of versions of quarantine models and look at what the Scandinavian countries
do in their criminal justice system or we could do it in like we can have a quarantine model for keeping people from
being dangerous your kid is sneezing a lot you don't send them to kindergarten tomorrow because they say please if your
child has a nose cold keep them home so they don't get everyone else sick you could constrain their behavior but you
don't take their toys away while they're at home as punish M for their Evil Soul or something yeah that's a realm in
which we can protect Society from one type of danger without having any sort
of ethical attribution or whatever that one we can solve but how do you solve
the one of get somebody to decide they really really really want to spend 14 years getting trained to be a
cardiothoracic surgeon or they really really want to go to this party and
their DM mates are doing it but instead they're going to study where where's the motivation come from for that and that
one's a much harder one I that one is much less clear out of
engineer Society so rather than protecting people from dangerous damaging individuals how to engineer
Society so that motivation is in some way separated
from attribution that is free will written and all over it yeah I don't
know anything I can come up with is like ridiculously utopian or whatever which
is you got to get people into some sort of mindset where somebody sits down at
the piano they're a concert pianist and they play and all of that to get into a mindset where what they will feel is
Wonder and gratitude that it turned out just by chance that they had hands that
could do things on a keyboard that will cause people to have emotions they never knew they had wow how lucky am I that it
turned out to be that way how luy yeah okay how lucky am I that I
turned out to be smart enough to be able to take out gleo blastomas or that I turned out to have the capacity for
empathy to do something nice for this homeless person yeah that's a hard cell
to turn all of that into just gratitude that Randomness made you into that sort
of person and thus you're willing to work with your unearned Gifts of
intellect and thus study for 47 years to be able to solve this problem or that
that one's a tough one I don't have an easy answer for that and
little little this is cheating but little
Echoes of meritocracy really I don't see a way
around that one easily I I've always uh answered this
What changes if there’s no free will?
question in terms of thinking about what's actually changed I mean you know
yesterday it still was the case that yesterday when I when I believed in free will the the actual in fact reason why I
got out of bed uh went to get some food was because I was hungry and my brain sort of determined that my legs would
move and go into the kitchen and and all of the deterministic factors were still there still acting on me the only thing
that's changed is I now recognize that that's why it's happening
now in the same way that yesterday I was hungry and then today I sit down with a biologist who explains to me in in
precise detail exactly why I feel hunger how it works how it's connected to the
body I still feel hungry and I still go and get the food I mean sure I I I can sort of on a on a on a meta level now
reflect more on what I'm doing here but it doesn't change the fact that I'm hungry so in the same way whatever was
motivating me yesterday to get out of bed is still motivating me to get out of bed today the only difference is I
recognize that I didn't control that motivation I don't know where it came from and sure I can sit there and I can meditate and I can think okay well
noticing that motivation coming over me to get up or maybe noticing that there is no motivation maybe I that day I I
feel depressed and I want to stay in bed all day but it seems weird for me to say
that the reason I'm going to stay in bed all day is because I recognize that
whichever decision I make whether to stay in bed or get up is outside of my control because the very fact that it's
outside of your control should mean that one of them's going to happen nonetheless and so I guess what I what I
ask I mean people often say to me is well you don't believe in free will but you know you don't act like you don't
believe in Free Will you you act like you believe in free will all the time and you just alluded to that there and in your book you say you know I find it
very difficult to live as if this is actually true but what does it mean to to live as if it's true it might change
the way that you morally assess people but even then does it really I mean you used the word rotten a moment ago you
said if someone cuts you off in traffic you're tempted to say well what a rotten person but what does the word rotten
mean it just means that it's sort of gone bad I mean an apple can go rotten but that doesn't make you mean you're
making a moral assessment of it it just means that you're looking at its behaviors and you're saying that in relation to what I want it to do for me
it's gone rotten and and so you know what really has to change just by adopting uh belief in determinism and
living as if that were true well what we have to go for
is amid this being incredibly hard work to think that way and to respond that
way and to feel that way um we have to save that effort for where it really
counts um almost certainly if it was 400 years ago you and I were both both you
know articulate and educated or whatever and if we were us 400 years ago almost
certainly it would have seemed just intuitively obvious that there are such things as witches and they can cause
lightning storms and you need to protect Society from them and there is a moral Justice in punishing them in the and 400
years later it is intuitively obvious to you and me that that's gibberish that makes no sense at all we're people of
our place and time now in that some of the things that are intuitively obvious
to right now to frame in a effortful free will kind of way people are not
going to believe at some point in the future okay so let's try to think about people 400 years from now let's think
about how each of us each of us has changed when I was a kid if the kid
sitting next to me in school wasn't learning how to read um I would have agreed with the teacher and everybody
else and okay some kids just aren't smart and they just don't work hard and all of that and like here we are some
decades later in the nature of knowledge in our world that we now know there's this thing called dyslexia like oh we've
been somewhere in the last 20 years or so in the United States um the majority
of people went from being opposed to gay marriage to supporting gay marriage
that's changed during that period sometime during this period people figured out that autism is not caused by
mothers who are incapable of Love autism is when there's something screwy and you
get little islands of unconnected function in the cortex during fetal life but these have happened in our own times
and what we see is the things that are so intuitively obviously free of Free
Will now it's so in obvious we don't even see it anymore like yeah you don't
your kid doesn't get a nose cold because they have a rotten Soul or because you have a rotten soul and their illness is
God's punishment to you for that yeah it's so obvious we can't even see anymore we did it we did that one we
subtracted that one out and what it means is whichever one seem most difficult right now when we're being
pulled in that direction it's not a to ly obvious yet that people who are kind
are not intrinsically more deserving humans than people who were not because neither had anything to do with it okay
that one's going to take some work that one we're at that challenge at this
point all save save the effort for the important ones I think that intuition of free will
actually as well and this might help people too is is is one of the problems of of Free Will and one of the ways to
to really get into discussing is to is to Simply ask a person well what do you mean by Free Will what this thing that
you sort of intuitively have describe it to me because what we're talking about here is you know somebody who says I
feel nihilistic because I've realized that all of my actions are determined and I say okay well what what's the alternative to that so so so suppose
that this action that you commit is is not determined by anything at all that means it's random you wouldn't be in
control of that either and if I if I convinced you that you were just random
events occurring all of the time and that's what you were that's all you are as a person wouldn't that instill a similar nihilistic crisis okay then
maybe Free Will is kind of being sort of partly determined partly not like who
like if you try to actually pin down the thing that you that you claim to believe in it actually becomes very difficult to
do and and I would say I mean this would be my argument and probably yours too that whatever you do land on is an idea
of what free will could be it usually ends up being either the self-contradictory it doesn't make sense impossible or it's describing something
that's not really free well like I think we would say the compatibilists do for example and so I don't even know what
this this this intuition really looks like like what is it that you want if if
this is troubling you you know yeah well we we have this tremendous source of
malaise in that like every other organism out there we're a biological machine but unlike
any other organism out there were the only one who could know our
Machin and be interested in its parameters and boundaries and who could
be meta enough to try to understand where some of the levers and buttons are in the machine that we are and
Machinists you know can leave a huge emotional Gap there um when it comes to
trying to understand like why we like sunsets or why where Love Came From or
why it feels good to make the planet a better place and and and the notion that
we're just observing a machine in action is really challenging in some ways
that's the human predicament we're smart enough to know our Machin this and we
have the cognitive and affective and cultural tools to try to deny that and
constrict very elaborate ways of saying that's not really the case so it's a it's not just a problem
of free will it's a problem of Being Human yeah um and and you know challenging positions are just uh what
we what we like to do here on the within reason podcast so uh Robert spolski thanks for thanks for coming on and
thanks for sharing your thoughts with us well thanks for having me on total fun and uh glad to see we think in such
similar ways if you enjoyed that conversation you can watch more episodes of the Within reason podcast by clicking
just here but remember the show is also on streaming platforms like apple podcasts and Spotify don't forget to
subscribe thank you for watching and I'll see you in the next one


The Freewill debate
imagine that everything you thought you
knew about freedom justice and
determinism was wrong you might just get
there by the end of this video the
question of whether we have free will is
one of the oldest in philosophy it was
touched upon by Aristotle and it's been
carried Through the Ages to be argued by
such varied Minds as David Hume Thomas
Hobbs and Sam Harris and I love this
debate because of just how divisive it
can get on the one hand you have people
asserting that Free Will is just obvious
they cite themselves as living examples
of this and say our entire Justice
System would collapse if we failed to
believe in total Free Will and on the
other hand you have people saying that
free will obviously doesn't exist and
any belief in it is just wishful
thinking or Superstition and cutting a
path between these two camps is a view
that says that we're not free in the
traditional sense but that we are free
in every way we care about get ready to
learn why it might not matter that all
your actions are predetermined why Free
Will is not truly free and why the whole
philosophical debate about Free Will
might be stuck in a deeply limited way
of thinking as always this is not a
comprehensive Guide to the field and I
want this to be an aid in your own
thinking not some kind of Twisted
philosophical prescription I don't have
the answers but you might but first you
might ask how could someone believe that
we don't have free will and this is just
our first point one free will and
Freewill and Determinism
determinism when you say someone has
free will what do you mean it is
normally something like this a person is
free in their choice to perform action a
if and only if they could have instead
performed action B in other words a
person is free if they did one thing but
they really could have done something
else instead this is a compelling
definition in a whole host of ways it
makes us responsible for our actions by
making us the cause of those very
actions and it plays into our idea that
while we act in one way we could just as
easily act in another way the story of
our actions on this account normally
goes something like this we have a
series of options what we will do in any
given situation and we pick one in a way
that is not determined by outside forces
in this way our will becomes a sort of
uncaused cause it can cause things but
it is not determined by something else
this almost amounts to saying the same
thing as someone could have done
otherwise but there are some differences
as we'll see later in the video someone
who believes in this definition of Free
Will and furthermore thinks that we have
it is called a Libertarian not to be
confused with political Libertarians who
while Charming tend to focus on
different issues now I'm sure many of my
more empirically minded viewers already
have alarm bells ringing is there not
something very suspicious about
proposing that we as physical beings
have something inside of us a will that
is not subject to the physical laws of
causation the determinist takes up this
suspicion with gusto and says that
contrary to popular opinion we do not
have free will and their argument for
this is as simple as it is compelling
they first point out that everything
physical has a cause if we were to know
everything about the state of the
universe at one point and all of the
laws of physics we could deduce
everything that was going to happen from
that point excluding some facts about
Quantum particles thus as far as physics
is concerned the universe is meant to be
perfectly predictable at least in the
world of anything bigger than a hydrogen
atom don't quote me on this I'm not a
Quantum physicist but I rung up my
friend who is a Quantum physicist and he
said that this is roughly correct the
second point is that we are physical
beings and so are our Wills so us and
our Wills must be subject to the causal
laws of physics this means that whatever
we do and whatever we desire to do must
have been causally determined and so the
libertarian Viewpoint that our Wills are
some sort of uncaused cause must be
false and in any one of our actions we
could not have done anything else I want
to emphasize here that the determinist
agrees with the libertarian on the
definition of free will they just think
that definition refers to something that
doesn't actually exist and there is
quite a lot to support the determinist
position to the extent that quite a lot
of people just see it as common sense
after all to refute it we have to posit
that the human will is somehow special
and exempt from all the rules and laws
that physics dictates for the rest of
the world either that or the libertarian
must give a detailed account of how the
indeterminacy inherent in quantum
physics gives rise to a common sense
notion of Freedom if you were deeply
religious these difficulties aren't that
hard after all you can appeal to
something non-physical but if you're not
then the libertarian position becomes
very difficult to halt in the words of
Pierre Simon laas the present state of
the universe is the effect of its past
and the cause of its future now there
are a few common misunderstandings of
determinism that I want to clear up here
the determinist is not saying that our
actions are pointless they aren't saying
that the world will turn out the same
whatever you do so you may as well lie
down in bed and rot they are in fact
saying the opposite it is an integral
part of the deterministic worldview that
our actions are causally effective it is
just that they and our Wills are
predetermined a lot of people have a
really visceral reaction when they come
across this view after all in everyday
life we are perfectly comfortable
referring to people as free and arguably
our entire Justice System rests on the
idea of personal responsibility meaning
that somebody is in control of their own
actions that they have free will this is
why we lesson someone's sentence on the
basis of temporary insanity we say that
they are not in their right mind because
something has temporarily seized control
of their wills and as a result they
could not help but whack that bloke
really hard round the head with that
Spade this is perhaps the most common
knee-jerk reaction to the determinist
but it is also perhaps the weakest
response because it attempts to refute a
theory about the World by pragmatic
concerns that are peculiar to humans now
as it happens because of a very
particular quirk in my personal
philosophy I am more open to this sort
of argument than most people but I still
don't think that you need it to respond
to the determinist we may be able to
accept everything that the determinist
says and at the same time claim that we
are free in every way that matters this
involves saying that we have made a
mistake from the start and the
traditional definition of Free Will is
mistaken so what is this mystical
philosophy that claims that we can have
our cake and eat it too well it is
called compatibilism and it involves a
total overhaul of how we think of
freedom and if you want to help me make
more videos like this consider
subscribing to my email list and my
patreon the links are in the description
Compatibilism and the Art of Compromise
two compatibilism and the Art of
compromise the comp aist shakes hands
with the determinist with a knife behind
their back they are willing to accept
all the propositions the determinist has
towards the physical world but at the
same time they think that determinist is
fighting a phantom definition of free
will that has very little to do with how
we actually use the term in our speech
the compatibilist defines an action as
free when it's caused by our internal
Wills rather than external causes
directly even if our internal Wills
themselves are predetermined we can see
that this is compatible with the
deterministic view of the world the
determinist thinks that our Wills are
determined by a causal chain that
stretches back to the dawn of time and
the compatibilist also thinks this the
compatibilist just says that provided
the causal chain goes through the
mechanism of our Wills then our choice
can be considered free but this is not
just a simple redefinition the
compatibilist claims that this is
already how we intuitively use the word
free before we move on I just want to
clarify that this is one definition of
compatibilism amongst many I have chosen
it for both its Simplicity and its
perceived strength but I encourage you
to learn more about the top and
different definitions of compatibilism
if you're interested an example might
help to illustrate the compatibilist
position for the sake of argument let's
imagine a definitely deterministic
Universe where we stipulate that
everyone's choices are predetermined in
this universe we have two people Walker
and sleeper Walker rather appropriately
loves to walk and he wakes up with a
deep desire to hike Ben Nevis he does so
and at the summit he feels rather
pleased with himself sleeper on the
other hand prefers to sleep all day but
unbeknownst to him a group of kidnappers
who broken into his house in the middle
of the night with the sole intention of
carrying him to the summit of Ben Nevis
there sleeper awakes wondering how on
Earth he got there the compatibilist
says that even if the wills of these two
people were predetermined Walker is free
in a way that sleeper is not Walker's
Ascension to the summit of Ben nevas was
in accordance with his will even if that
will was predetermined whereas the
sleeper Ascent was not in accordance
with his will he was carried there The
Walker freely ascended Ben nevas whereas
the sleeper did not examples like this
motivate the compatibilist definition of
free will because they suggest that the
classic definition just wasn't in line
with the way we intuitively use the word
in the Ben neice example we want to
intuitively call the walker free and the
sleeper unfree even though we have
stipulated that the thought experiment
takes place within a deterministic
universe and this example also
illustrates how the compatibilist can
have both Free Will and determinism if
we accept that the compatibilist
definition is table then we can decide
whether an action is free based on
whether it went through the mechanism of
the will of the actor regardless of
whether the will itself was freely
chosen in fact if we push the
compatibilist argument a step further we
might even say that the traditional
definition of Free Will was deeply
misguided hear me out as this is a
controversial argument to say the least
if we're to believe in Free Will as
traditionally defined then we have the
will as a sort of uncaused cause
choosing our actions but how exactly do
we make sense of this notion of an
uncaused cause immediately there seem to
be two possible options one our choices
are probabilistic two our choices are
completely indeterminate that is there
are no causal factors affecting our
choices let's look at the first option
here we imagine a map of probabilities
over the options available to someone
that conform to the constraints of
probability Theory so if someone was
picking between two choices they might
have a 60% chance of choosing option A
and A 40% chance of choosing option b
but while this is not deterministic is
it in any sense better from the
libertarian point of view in this
picture we are still slaves to
probabilities in the same way that we
were slaves to deterministic causes
before it doesn't seem like the
libertarian has actually made any ground
here probabilistic causation doesn't
seem in the spirit of the libertarian
position but if we take the other route
and say that there are no causes
affecting our decisions then this
doesn't seem like Freedom at all our
choices would then seem entirely
unpredictable they would be shots in the
dark with no reason behind them there
would not be freedom but Insanity either
way we render the libertarian
unsatisfied it's also worth noting that
this option would violate reason's
responsiveness which is a key part of a
lot of modern libertarian definitions of
free will compare this to a
deterministic choice that we might
regard as free let's pretend that I am
rational and I'm presented with a very
easy bet I could bet £50 on a race horse
that has a 70% chance of winning or £50
on a race horse that has a 30% chance of
winning and either way the payout is the
same the choice is so obvious that it
seems like I would never choose anything
other than the racehorse that has a 70%
chance of winning my choice is in some
sense predetermined by my motivation to
win the bet and the bare probabilities
of the situation arguments like this
this suggests that the libertarian
definition of Free Will doesn't seem
relevant at all and upon closer
inspection it doesn't seem like it's
talking about our intuitive sense of
Freedom if true this seems like it would
be an immense shift in how we think
about human free will however it's worth
noting that there are many open
questions about this argument first
there might be some third option where
we Define indeterministic choices in an
acceptable manner perhaps a stochastic
model which mixes Randomness with
statistical predictability or perhaps we
could appeal to an account of reasons
which leaves our choices as inet detate
but also in some sense down to us there
is a whole field of philosophy that is
devoted to indeterministic accounts of
causation that leave our Free Will
intact at least in theory and in its
primitive form this argument does not do
any of them Justice nonetheless I
include it here because of its neat
logical structure and its deeply
unintuitive conclusions but either way I
think that examples like the Ben Nevis
one show that there is enough
philosophical motivation for the
compatibilist definition of free will
that it should be considered a serious
contender in the philosophical debate
around free freedom but it is not all
Rosy in the compatibilist garden and
there are a number of serious criticisms
of the position I'll now turn to just a
few starting with perhaps the most
intuitive of them all sorry this is a
small caveat from editing Joe it's very
late so I'll try and keep this brief
something I didn't mention here but
probably should have is that the
plausibility of compatibilism largely
depends on what you want to get out of
free will if you just can't conceive a
free will without the ability to do
otherwise then you just won't find this
account particularly compellent if so
then I encourage you to think of
compatibilism as seeing how much free
will you can Recon construct within the
context of determinism as whether you
think that Free Will proper requires the
ability to do otherwise this is
nonetheless a worthy philosophical goal
But ultimately the strength of the
compatibilist definition does rest on
how willing you are to accept a
definition of free will that doesn't
include the ability to do otherwise and
while the thought experiments are
intended to sort of pump this intuition
out of you there is a totally fair
response that just says no ability to do
otherwise then no free will it's a
classic example of a philosophical
trade-off I just thought this was worth
mentioning here in case anyone was
getting the nagging feeling that all
this arguing is somehow besides the
point because you're not alone in that
thought however I also don't want to
dwell on this criticism for too long as
it largely relies on divergences of
intuitions and to that extent it's sort
of a dialectical dead end anyway back to
the video three but we cannot choose our
But we cannot choose our wills
Wills a lot of responses to the
compatibilist position take issue with
their distinction between will-based and
external causes for the compatibilist
there needs to be some philosophical
distinction between the causes that are
by the will and those that are entirely
external to the will this is what is
meant to make the Walker free and the
sleeper unfree in our Ben never story
and without this their entire account
collapses however some view the
distinction as spurious because they say
there is no principled reason why on a
deterministic worldview we should
distinguish between will-based and
external causes on a Libertarian
Viewpoint they're distinguished by the
fact that external causes are
deterministic but will-based causes are
indeterministic but now we have no way
of cutting the difference between the
two thus the compatibilist is accused of
making a totally ad hoc distinction here
to rescue a conception of free will this
argument is laid out incredibly codent
in a video by Alex okon which I'll link
in the description he references a paper
by philosopher Peter Van inv vargon
which claims that there are touchable
facts and Untouchable facts and that the
property of untouchability is transitive
over causation that is if Untouchable
fact P causes Q then fact Q is also
Untouchable so since on a deterministic
worldview our Wills are caused by
external factors and our actions are
caused by our Wills everything along the
line is Untouchable and the distinction
between will based and external causes
becomes pointless it allows the freedom
robbing properties of determinism to
Ripple out from the beginning of the
universe all the way down to our
present-- day choices thinkers like van
invagen use arguments like this to claim
that the distinction between will-based
and external causes is simply untenable
and this is no small problem for the
compatibilist in philosophy it is
considered incredibly bad form to make
what are called ad hoc distinctions and
definitions for instance if you and I
were having an argument about God and
you pointed to all of the things that
God once explained but now doesn't and I
defended the existence of God by
defining him as the being whose
existence explains all the things that
we'll never know then this would be seen
as a poor definition by virtue of the
fact that it is ad hoc it is not to do
with how we actually use the word God or
any religious definition of God it is
instead purposefully constructed to
refute an atheist argument the
determinists can argue the same about
the compatibilist distinction between
will-based and external causes does this
have any actual motivation Beyond simply
solving the problem of determinism well
according to the compatibilist the
answer is a definitive yes this is both
because of thought experiments like the
Ben nebis one earlier which suggests
that we do use freedom in a way that is
compatible with determinism but also
because they say that we are already
committed to the distinction between
will-based and external causes and not
just in the debate around free will if
we return to our imaginary deterministic
world we can think of two criminals one
called stabby and one called Sleep
shooter stabby has killed a man by
stabbing him he wanted to and then he
did even though he didn't choose to want
to since we're in a deterministic world
sleep shooter however suffers from a
rare form of sleepwalking whereby he
shoots at everything that moves one day
he accidentally falls asleep on a bench
and as a result shoots a passer by in
his sleep here we would intuitively hold
stabby responsible for his actions in a
way that we wouldn't hold sleep shooter
because the cause of stab's actions was
his will even if that will was
predetermined whereas the cause of sleep
Shooter's actions was his peculiar
medical condition and it was not in his
will to shoot his victim even if the
action of him shooting his victim was
predetermined cases like this attempt to
demonstrate that the distinction between
will-based and external causes is not ad
hoc but instead deeply motivated by our
intuitive Notions of freedom and
responsibility they claim it is closer
to how we use these words in our actual
life than any sort of mysterious
definition involving uncaused causes and
possible worlds where we did something
else so many compatibilists consider
that their definition between will-based
and external causes is tenable but this
is by no means the end of the compatibl
ist's issues and there are very strong
problems just over the horizon four
Pressure, Coercion, and Intimidation
pressure coercion and intimidation
imagine that myself and my friend are
going out for the day he wants to go to
the cinema but I want to go to the zoo
as they have a new tiger so I set about
trying to change my friend's mind I
first appealed to his love of tigers
saying that he too would want to see the
stripy carnivorous Fiend I next start
applying a certain amount of pressure by
showing emotional distress at not going
to the zoo next I start emotionally
blackmailing him by insinuating that I
wouldn't be his friend unless he
followed my wishes lastly I hold a gun
to his head and say we are going to the
zoo my question to you is at what point
was the cause of my friend going to the
zoo no longer his own will but instead
the result of some external Factor
namely me we would intuitively say that
if I used reason to change my friend's
will then he seems like he's still
totally free and some might think that
if he changes his mind because of my
visible emotional stress that is still a
free choice on his part but most of us
would say that if I apply excessive
emotional pressure and certainly if I
threaten him with physical violence then
my friend is no longer free but as
instead being coerced but this opens up
a problem for the compatibilist because
ultimately the causal chain has still
gone through my friend's will so what
are the sort of external causes that
enact on our will while maintaining our
freedom and when do we cease to be free
in the case of my unfortunate friend it
seems that once I put a gun twiss head
even if he then chose to go to the zoo
that would in some sense not be a free
choice since his will was choosing
between going to the zoo and being shot
in the head compatibilists have
recognized this issue and placed
constraints on when a choice is truly
will Will based some have placed the
constraint that one's will should not be
dominated by the will of another and
have then cashed out the term dominated
in various ways others have said that a
will is not free when it is under the
threat of physical harm be that from
violence or deprivation of resources now
the trouble with a lot of these
Solutions is that they do seem a bit ad
hoc they seem to arise only to solve
particular problem cases there is the
problem of somebody being threatened and
often the response is just well
someone's not free if they're being
threatened and this seems just a bit
philosophically unsatisfying though I
also want to note here that the ad hoc
charge does not apply to all attempts to
solve this problem some are
sophisticated and principled and I also
don't have time to go into them here
however the compatibilist can simply
respond by saying that this is not a
problem unique for compatibilism the
libertarian definition of free will also
comes up against this problem of
coercion since even if somebody had a
gun to their head they could technically
still do otherwise their will would
still be an uncaused cause but that
doesn't mean that we want to call them
free but I think within this thorny
problem is a potential development of
our concept of freedom and even of the
will itself we have so far been
conceiving of the will as a single
object within each of us that can only
have a point in One Direction but
doesn't this seem a bit simplistic after
all one of the great discoveries of
psychology and psychoanalysis is that
our mind can be at war with itself
tugging Us in all different directions
and causing us immense distress in the
process as far back as St Augustine
philosophers have recognized that we can
desire two things at once but we often
throw these discoveries to the side when
we're debating Free Will perhaps our
whole debate on freedom and determinism
has relied on a conception of the will
that is fundamentally untenable and this
is just what I want to move on to
discussing next bear in mind for this
next section that this is more of a
sketch of an argument than anything else
it is more aimed at opening up a world
of possibilities rather than claiming
anything definitive five gradability of
The Gradability of Freedom
Freedom picture again our scale of
coercion with spontaneous desire on the
one hand and threats of death on the
other doesn't this give us a nice
structure to think about Freedom we can
start to picture it not as an onoff
setting but rather as a one-dimensional
scale tracking the extent to which our
will is aligned On Any Given decision so
my example of going to the zoo in each
scenario my friend has increasingly
conflicted desires if he can be
persuaded to go to the zoo with some
gentle reasoning then he must have
really been quite keen on going anyway
he just wanted to go to the cinema more
but if it takes emotional coercion or
even threat to physical violence to get
him the zoo then he must have been dead
set against the idea in the first place
his will would be like two horses
pulling him in different directions one
of which desperately does not want to go
to the zoo and the other of which
desperately does not want to get shot
the details of the scale would need some
serious tweaking and I'm not even
convinced that it would remain
one-dimensional one issue is that
there's a marked difference between
someone's will being divided over going
to two different parties and being
threatened by force to do something that
you really don't want to do one is
simple indecision but the other seems
deeply unfree this is not to say that
these problems don't have potential
solutions for instance we could say that
the difference between indecision and
coercion is that indecision is someone's
will being split gently between two
different possibilities where whereas
coercion is someone's innate desire to
avoid harm pulling them towards a choice
that they desperately do not want to
make again the details would need to be
expanded upon but my general point is
this unless you are a diard determinist
who thinks that any attempt at
compatibilism is just wishful thinking
or misguided then our definition of
freedom does not need to be as simple as
either we are free or we are not we can
imagine a whole scale of different
levels of freedom and this possibility
is often overlooked in philosophical
discussions to return to the libertarian
definition of freedom if someone takes
an action but technically they could
have done otherwise does it matter how
many different options they had is a
person who could have done otherwise in
two ways less free than a person who
could have done otherwise in 20 ways
these are the questions we can begin to
ask ourselves if we start looking at
Free Will as a scale this is separate
from any debate about positive or
negative freedom but is instead a
conception of Freedom that is just
continuous rather than simply asking
does Free Will exist we can start asking
how free is someone in situation X
compared with situation y a whole host
of philosophical questions become
available to us opening up a new
dimension to this debate and if someone
is a determinist but they recognize
there is some validity in the
compatibilist pointing out that even in
a deterministic world some people are
Freer than others then they can
incorporate that onto the scale somebody
who's being coerced can be extra not
free views like this become defensible
in a way that they simply would not be
in a binary conception of Free Will and
I have a hunch this might help some
people reconcile tensions in their
philosophical positions of course there
could be damning arguments against this
conception of of free will but I just
want to open it as a possibility
sometimes we are so caught up in a
particular philosophical problem that we
forget how many conceptual possibilities
are available to us and moving a binary
question to one involving scales is just
one example of this so we may not have
solved the problem of Free Will which
would be a pretty bold idea for a
50-minute YouTube video but I hope I
have put the problem in a new light it
is not simply Free Will versus
determinism there is a whole world of
philosophical positions out there Each
of which is worthy of careful
consideration maybe our classic
definition of Free Will was mistaken all
along maybe we need definitions of free
will that can still work within a
deterministic universe and maybe freedom
is far more complicated than a simple
onoff switch let me know what you think
in the comments below and if you want a
completely different perspective on the
matter of free will then check out this
video where friederick ner tells us all
how we can become less free through
weakness and stick around for more on
thinking to improve your life


ntro and Content Summary
Today I want to talk about an issue that must have occurred to everyone who spent some time
thinking about physics. Which is that the idea of free will is both incompatible with
the laws of nature and entirely meaningless. I know that a lot of people just do not want
to believe this. But I think you are here to hear what the science says. So, I will
tell you what the science says. In this video I first explain why free will does not exist,
indeed makes no sense, and then tell you why there are better things to worry about.
Free will as the possibility to select a future
I want to say ahead that there is much discussion about free will in neurology, where the question
is whether we subconsciously make decisions before we become consciously aware of having
made one. I am not a neurologist, so this is not what I am concerned with here. I will
be talking about free will as the idea that in this present moment, several futures are
possible, and your “free will” plays a role for selecting which one of those possible
futures becomes reality. This, I think, is how most of us intuitively think of free will
because it agrees with our experience of how the world seems to works. It is not how some
philosophers have defined free will, and I will get to this later. But first, let me
tell you what’s wrong with this intuitive idea that we can somehow select among possible
Free will is incompatible with the laws of nature
futures.
Last week, I explained what differential equations are, and that all laws of nature which we
currently know work with those differential equations. These laws have the common property
that if you have an initial condition at one moment in time, for example the exact details
of the particles in your brain and all your brain’s inputs, then you can calculate what
happens at any other moment in time from those initial conditions. This means in a nutshell
that the whole story of the universe in every single detail was determined already at the
big bang. We are just watching it play out.
These deterministic laws of nature apply to you and your brain because you are made of
particles, and what happens with you is a consequence of what happens with those particles.
A lot of people seem to think this is a philosophical position. They call it “materialism” or
“reductionism” and think that giving it a name that ends on –ism is an excuse to
not believe it. Well, of course you can insist to just not believe reductionism is correct.
But this is denying scientific evidence. We do not guess, we know that brains are made
of particles. And we do not guess, we know, that we can derive from the laws for the constituents
what the whole object does. If you make a claim to the contrary, you are contradicting
well-established science. I can’t prevent you from denying scientific evidence, but
I can tell you that this way you will never understand how the universe really works.
So, the trouble with free will is that according to the laws of nature that we know describe
humans on the fundamental level, the future is determined by the present. That the system
Chaos and quantum mechanics make no difference
– in this case, your brain – might be partly chaotic does not make a difference
for this conclusion, because chaos is still deterministic. Chaos makes predictions difficult,
but the future still follows from the initial condition.
What about quantum mechanics? In quantum mechanics some events are truly random and cannot be
predicted. Does this mean that quantum mechanics is where you can find free will? Sorry, but
no, this makes no sense. These random events in quantum mechanics are not influenced by
you, regardless of exactly what you mean by “you”, because they are not influenced
by anything. That’s the whole point of saying they are fundamentally random. Nothing determines
their outcome. There is no “will” in this. Not yours and not anybody else’s.
Free will is nonsense
Taken together we therefore have determinism with the occasional, random quantum jump,
and no combination of these two types of laws allows for anything resembling this intuitive
idea that we can somehow choose which possible future becomes real. The reason this idea
of free will turns out to be incompatible with the laws of nature is that it never made
sense in the first place. You see, that thing you call “free will” should in some sense
allow you to choose what you want. But then it’s either determined by what you want,
in which case it’s not free, or it’s not determined, in which case it’s not a will.
Other definitions of free will
Now, some have tried to define free will by the “ability to have done otherwise”.
But that’s just empty words. If you did one thing, there is no evidence you could
have done something else because, well, you didn’t. Really there is always only your
fantasy of having done otherwise.
In summary, the idea that we have a free will which gives us the possibility to select among
different futures is both incompatible with the laws of nature and logically incoherent.
I should add here that it’s not like I am saying something new. Look at the writing
of any philosopher who understand physics, and they will acknowledge this.
But some philosophers insist they want to have something they can call free will, and
have therefore tried to redefine it. For example, you may speak of free will if no one was in
practice able to predict what you would do. This is certainly presently the case, that
most human behavior is unpredictable, though I can predict that some people who didn’t
actually watch this video will leave a comment saying they had no other choice than leaving
their comment and think they are terribly original.
So, yeah, if you want you can redefine “free will” to mean “no one was able to predict
your decision.” But of course your decision was still determined or random regardless
of whether someone predicted it. Others have tried to argue that free will means some of
your decisions are dominated by processes internal to your brain and not by external
influences. But of course your decision was still determined or random, regardless of
whether it was dominated by internal or external influences. I find it silly to speak of “free
will” in these cases.
I also find it unenlightening to have an argument about the use of words. If you want to define
free will in such a way that it is still consistent with the laws of nature, that is fine by me,
though I will continue to complain that’s just verbal acrobatics. In any case, regardless
of how you want to define the word, we still cannot select among several possible futures.
This idea makes absolutely no sense if you know anything about physics.
What is really going on
What is really going on if you are making a decision is that your brain is running a
calculation, and while it is doing that, you do not know what the outcome of the calculation
will be. Because if you did, you wouldn’t have to do the calculation. So, the impression
of free will comes from our self-awareness, that we think about what to do, combined with
our inability to predict the result of that thinking before we’re done.
Reacting to a prediction is not free will
I feel like I must add here a word about the claim that human behavior is unpredictable
because if someone told you that they predicted you’d do one thing, you could decide to
do something else. This is a rubbish argument because it has nothing to do with human behavior,
it comes from interfering with the system you are making predictions for. It is easy
to see that this argument is nonsense because you can make the same claim about very simple
computer codes. Suppose you have a computer that evaluates
whether an equation has a real-valued root. The answer is yes or no. You can predict the
answer. But now you can change the algorithm so that if you input the correct answer, the
code will output the exact opposite answer, ie “yes” if you predicted “no” and
“no” if you predicted “yes”. As a consequence, your prediction will never be
correct. Clearly, this has nothing to do with free will but with the fact that the system
you make a prediction for gets input which the prediction didn’t account for. There’s
nothing interesting going on in this argument.
Free will is unnecessary for moral behavior
Another objection that I’ve heard is that I should not say free will does not exist
because that would erode people’s moral behavior. The concern is, you see, that if
people knew free will does not exist, then they would think it doesn’t matter what
they do. This is of course nonsense. If you act in ways that harm other people, then these
other people will take steps to prevent that from happening again. This has nothing to
do with free will. We are all just running software that is trying to optimize our well-being.
If you caused harm, you are responsible, not because you had “free will” but because
you embody the problem and locking you up will solve it.
There have been a few research studies that supposedly showed a relation between priming
participants to not believe in free will and them behaving immorally. The problem with
these studies, if you look at how they were set up, is that people were not primed to
not believe in free will. They were primed to think fatalistically. In some cases, for
example, they were being suggested that their genes determine their future, which, needless
to say, is only partly correct, regardless of whether you believe in free will. And some
more nuanced recent studies have actually shown the opposite. A 2017 study on free will
and moral behavior concluded “we observed that disbelief in free will had a positive
impact on the morality of decisions toward others”. Please check the information below
the video for a reference.
How to live without free will
So I hope I have convinced you that free will is nonsense, and that the idea deserves going
into the rubbish bin. The reason this has not happened yet, I think, is that people
find it difficult to think of themselves in any other way than making decisions drawing
on this non-existent “free will.” So what can you do? You don’t need to do anything.
Just because free will is an illusion does not mean you are not allowed to use it as
a thinking aid. If you lived a happy life so far using your imagined free will, by all
means, please keep on doing so.
If it causes you cognitive dissonance to acknowledge you believe in something that doesn’t exist,
I suggest that you think of your life as a story which has not yet been told. You are
equipped with a thinking apparatus that you use to collect information and act on what
you have learned from this. The result of that thinking is determined, but you still
have to do the thinking. That’s your task. That’s why you are here. I am curious to
see what will come out of your thinking, and you should be curious about it too.
Why am I telling you this? Because I think that people who do not understand that free
will is an illusion underestimate how much their decisions are influenced by the information
they are exposed to. After watching this video, I hope, some of you will realize that to make
the best of your thinking apparatus, you need to understand how it works, and pay more attention
to cognitive biases and logical fallacies.
Thanks for watching, see you next week.


where does freedom come from if we don't
have any kind of physics-based free will
yeah and and so the idea
follows naturally from all that we've
been talking about let's make the
assumption
that all there is in the physical
universe is stuff governed by laws we
may not have those laws may may not know
what the fundamental stuff is yet
but everything we know in science points
in the direction that it's physical
stuff governed by universal laws
and
that being the case or that being the
assumption then you come to a particular
collection of those ingredients called a
human being and that human being has
particles that are fully governed by
physical law
and when you then recognize that every
thought that we have every action that
we undertake is just the motion of
particles when i'm thinking thoughts
right now of course at this level of
description
it is the motion of particles cascading
down various neurons inside of my head
and so on and every single one of those
motions collectively and individually is
fully governed by these laws that we
perhaps don't have yet but we imagine
one day we will that leaves no
opportunity for any kind of freedom to
break free from the constraint of
physical law and that is the end of the
story so the traditional intuitive
notion of free will that we're the
ultimate authors of our actions that
where the buck stops that there is no
antecedent that is the cause for our
decided to go left or right choose
vanilla or chocolate live or die
that intuitive sensation does not have a
basis in our understanding of the
physical world so that's the end of the
free will of the traditional sword but
then your question is
what about this other kind of freedom i
talk about and the other kind of freedom
if you focus on it intently i think
is actually
the true version of freedom that we feel
and that freedom is this
you look at inanimate objects in the
world rocks bottles of water whatever
they have a very limited behavioral
repertoire why
their internal organization is too
coarse for them to do very much right
you have to you try to have a
conversation with a glass of water you
send sound waves it doesn't do much it
may vibrate a little bit but the
repertoire of responses are incredibly
limited
the difference between us and a rock or
a bottle of water is that our inner
organization by virtue of eons of
evolution by natural selection is so
refined so spectacularly ordered that we
have a huge repertoire of behaviors that
are finely attuned to stimuli from the
external world you ask me a question
that's a stimulus and all of a sudden
these particle processes go into action
and this
is the result this answer that i'm
giving you so the freedom that we have
is not from
the control of physical law the freedom
that we have is from the constrained
behavior that has long since governed
inanimate objects we are liberated from
the limited behavioral repertoire of
rocks and bottles of water
to have this broad spectrum of responses
do we pick them we do not do we freely
choose them we do not
but yet we have them and we can marvel
at those behaviors and that's the
freedom that we have the complexity and
the breadth of that repertoire is is
where the freedom
you


- People often think that illusions are evolved
for their usefulness,
but the truth is that most illusions
that we experience are actually glitches.
One example of this is the illusion of self
and the illusion of free will,
and the illusion of free will
and self are really two sides of the same coin.
It's this experience we all have
of being a solid entity,
an unchanging entity that moves through time,
that is somehow living somewhere inside my body.
It's my body, it's my brain,
and therefore, somehow separate from the physical world,
and this illusion confuses us about our place in nature
and the state of reality on on many different levels.
But the truth is that there really is this positive way
to view it.
So I think that free will, for the most part,
is an illusion.
But when I talk about free will,
I like to distinguish between conscious will and free will.
So I use the term free will
to talk about decision-making processes in nature,
which there clearly are.
If you look at something like a pea tendril,
when it senses that it's close to a branch
that it can wrap itself around,
it starts growing more quickly in that direction,
and then it changes the growth,
so that it wraps itself around a branch.
Most of us wouldn't consider that
to be a free decision-making process.
It's a cause and effect process that occurs in nature.
And as you move up in complexity to the level of brains
and then human brains,
the number of factors that come into play
are so expansive
that it would be impossible for us to track them all.
But it is a process,
and it's a process by which the brain is interacting
with the exterior world
and measuring the different outcomes
of the different possible futures,
and then ultimately making a decision.
This is something that I think we can refer to as free will,
and that what many people mean by free will.
The problem with having "free" in the title
is that it's not free in the way we feel it is,
and this is where the illusion comes in.
We begin with this illusion of self,
of being this solid, concrete entity
that lives somewhere in the head,
and even though we know better,
feels as though it's separate from the physical world
and separate from the cause-effect relationships
that we know to be in place
that could somehow freely make a decision,
or freely intervene in the physical world outside
of the relationships of cause and effect.
And because everything we experience,
everything we know takes place
within this felt experience of consciousness,
we often equate this feeling of self with consciousness,
and that I think is clearly an illusion,
and I call that conscious will
because it is this feeling
that my conscious experience is this self
and is the thing that has this freedom,
and this is how the illusion of self
and the illusion of free will are related.
There was a very interesting study done in 2013
in which they put participants in an fMRI machine
and showed them a screen,
and presented two numbers on that screen,
and they gave them the option of either adding
or subtracting these two numbers,
and they were scanning the activity
of these participants' brains
while they were doing this calculation,
and the result of this study
was that the experimenters could tell up to four seconds
not only when this person was going to make the decision,
but whether they decided to add or subtract,
and so you get the sense viscerally that there's no self
or free will making decisions behind the scenes,
but that in terms of your conscious experience,
a decision really arises.
So when I talk about the illusion of self,
this is often very hard for people
to grasp what that could even mean,
and so I'd first like to just be very clear
about what I'm not talking about
when I talk about the illusion of self.
So what is not an illusion is the fact
that we are organisms and systems in nature,
and that we have certain tendencies,
and that we're organized in a certain way,
and so we can talk about ourselves in the same way
that we can talk about a cat as another organism in nature,
or even an ocean wave.
But even though we can label it a wave
and we can call it a wave
and talk about the types of things waves do,
we all understand
that a wave is not a static thing in nature.
It's a process,
and our brains are very much the same thing.
They are processes in nature that are ever-changing,
ever-evolving,
that we are in constant communication
with the external world,
and that the boundaries between ourselves and the world
and ourselves and each other are not as solid
and firm as they appear to us
or that they feel to us to be,
especially when we feel like a static self.
So the neuroscience is really still in its infancy,
but we're starting to learn more
and more about how this illusion of self gets created.
Part of it has to do with something called change blindness,
which we know about in vision.
We have a blind spot in our visual field
that we are not conscious of,
that we don't detect,
and neuroscientists are just now starting to understand
that there is a change blindness with respect
to our experience over time,
so that we don't notice how different each
of our experiences in every moment are from every other,
which adds to this illusion of being a solid entity
that moves through time unchanged,
and we also know that memory plays a role
in creating this experience of self as well.
There's a sense in which all of the memories
that we have access to over time were being experienced
by the same subject,
and you can imagine if your memories weren't strung together
and your experience was just of each present moment,
there'd be much less of a sense
of a self moving through time.
We're also learning a little bit more
about what neuroscientists refer to
as the default mode network.
So we know that when the default mode network is active,
we are highly aware of this illusion of self,
and it tends to quiet down when we're experiencing
what people talk about as a flow state.
So when we're very immersed in our work,
if we're very immersed in a sport,
when people are under the influence
of some psychedelic substances,
or various meditation techniques
that quiet down the default mode network,
we are not so aware of self versus other
or self versus world,
which is actually closer to the underlying reality.
So many people find this realization
to be quite disconcerting,
which is understandable,
and I think one way to address that is levels of usefulness.
The vast majority of the time,
it is not useful or helpful to realize
that there's an illusion of sorts taking place.
One example I like to give
is that we more or less walk around with the illusion
that the Earth is flat,
and we act as though the Earth is flat,
and that's the best way to go about our everyday lives.
If we constantly reminded ourselves
that the Earth is a sphere, and had to keep that in mind,
and had to feel that way everywhere we went,
it would just be an annoying distraction,
and would get in the way of all kinds of activities
and would not be helpful.
And the same is true of the illusion of self
and the illusion of free will.
There are places where it's useful.
It's useful, obviously, for the sciences
and for neuroscience,
but it actually can also be useful psychologically
in certain circumstances, and again,
this isn't something you wanna remind yourself of
in every moment,
but there are moments where realizing
that there's an experience
of conscious will taking place
can be quite liberating.
Many people get stuck in feeling responsible
for their psychological state,
and there's a way in which simply being
with whatever uncomfortable emotions you're experiencing,
whether it's sadness or frustration or anger,
being with them rather than believing
that you are controlling them can be extremely beneficial
for psychological wellbeing.
There are also ways
that we can apply this in our relationships
with other people.
I sometimes talk about the fact
that you would never get angry at a tornado,
and that doesn't mean anger doesn't have a place
in society and culture.
But there are times when anger can overcome us
and start to rule our lives in a way
that is incredibly unhelpful and unhealthy,
and when we understand
that our brains are essentially processes playing out
in nature,
and there isn't a solid self to every person
that is somehow evil
or worthy of blame can also be liberating
to notice in certain circumstances.
- [Narrator] Want to dive deeper?
Become a Big Think member,
and join our members-only community, watch videos early,
and unlock full interviews.


URI MAOZ: We all kind of go  around with this feeling that  
we are the authors of our lives and we are  in control, that I could've done otherwise.  
To what extent is the  conscious we are we in control?
NARRATOR: The subconscious is a force that looms  large below the surface of our conscious minds,  
and it's controlling our lives  much more than we're aware.
MAOZ: Free will is at the basis  of a lot of our social pillars.  
Our legal system presumes some kind of freedom.  
There are economic theories that assume that  people are free to make their decisions.  
So for all those things, understanding how free  we are, the limits of our freedom, how easy it  
is to manipulate our freedom and so on I think  is important. If we understand the interplay  
between conscious and unconscious, it might help  us realize what we can control and what we can't.  
My name is Uri Maoz, I study how the brain  enables things like consciousness and free will.
INTERVIEWER:  
Okay, Uri, what is free will?
MAOZ: Sure, that's easy. Generally, humans  have a sense that they control themselves  
and sometimes their environment more than they  do. You don't try to control every contraction  
of every muscle in your hand. And if you did try  (laughs) to control that, well good luck to you  
because if you try to concentrate exactly on how  it is that you're walking, it's even hard to walk.  
So there are certain places in the brain that  if you stimulate there a person begins to laugh.  
You ask them, "Wait, why are you laughing?"  And they say, "Oh, I just remembered this  
really funny joke." The brain kind of puts  together some reasons for something that you did  
while we think they are under our  full conscious control they are not.
There is a famous experiment made in the early  '80s by Benjamin Libet. The idea is that a person  
is holding their hand and they're told whenever  they have the urge to do so, you flex whenever  
you want. However at the same time, there is this  rotating dot on the screen and your job is to look  
at the screen and say where the dot was when you  first had the urge to move. So then you have this  
weird situation, only 200 milliseconds before you  move do people say, "I'm aware that I've decided  
to move." But if you look into their brain, you  can see something there a second before they do.
So what happens in that interval? Some kind of  nefarious neuroscientist that would an electrode  
on you would say, "Aha, you're about to move  now." But you would not be conscious of it,  
and some people interpret the  Libet experiment to suggest that  
all of these big important life  decisions are maybe unconscious.
NARRATOR: Libet's experiment proved  controversial, but inspired subsequent tests.  
Dr. Maoz's own research attempted to observed  the brain signals Libet measured in real time  
by directly monitoring the  brain of epilepsy patients.
MAOZ: We approach some of these patients  and we say, "Would you please play  
something like a two choice version of rock,  paper, scissors? At the go signal we each  
raise a hand and, let's say, if we raise the  same hand, I win, if we raise different hands  
you win." We had a system that was processing  the whole thing in real time, and just before  
we got the go signal, I got a beep in my  earphones telling me which hand to raise  
so I would beat the subject. We could predict  them about 80% of the time. Even if we,  
let's say, we don't have as much free will about  raising my right or my left hand right now,  
to some extent who cares? It's just, I mean,  nobody's gonna take you to court because you  
raise your right hand and not your left  hand for no reason and for no purpose.
Now let's say that I say to you, there's a  burning car and you have to decide whether  
to run in and try to save your friend or not?  Okay, now you're making a decision that matters.
NARRATOR: So how do you take control back from  you subconscious? The trick may be found in a  
fable about Ulysses, the ancient Greek warrior  who while sailing home was told about the sirens.  
The sirens were monsters posing as beautiful women  who would sing to passing ships hoping to lure  
them closer and ultimately to their death. Ulysses  was warned of the sirens ahead of time and knew  
that his subconscious would be unable to resist  the siren songs. So Ulysses made a conscious  
decision ahead of time to have his crew fill  their ears with beeswax and tie him to the mast.  
Ulysses and his crew sailed  past the sirens unharmed.
MAOZ: You could think about this as a struggle  between like the later unconscious and current  
conscious because later on I will not be in a  position to control myself in the way that I want  
it. Neuroscience is a newcomer to the field of  free will. What are exactly the kind of questions  
that are worth asking? What different kinds of  experiments that can say something about conscious  
and unconscious decisions could help us be more  modest in what we realize we can control and what  
we can't, and then also be a bit more forgiving  towards ourselves about our decisions and our  
actions? Not everything is within our control as  much as we would think or maybe even would wish.  
Do I have free will depends, of course, on  the definition. In the sense that the world  
could go one way or another way depending on my  decision, no, I don't think I have that power.  
But to the extent that I can act  according to my desires and my wishes,  
yes, I- I think I can. I wish  to be here and here I am.
NARRATOR: To learn more about challenging ideas  like this, visit us at templeton.org/bigquestions.


Free will vs. determinism
- It's very often that in the conversations about free will,
you find people who believe in free will
contrasted with determinists,
who just think the laws of physics are gonna tell us
what happens in the world.
'Determinism' is a statement
about how the laws of physics work.
It goes back to Pierre-Simon Laplace
Determinism
explicating the implications of classical mechanics,
a la Isaac Newton.
He says, "If you knew the position
and velocity of everything in the world,
the equations of classical physics
deterministically predict what will happen next."
There's no randomness:
you know exactly what's gonna happen in the future.
To me, this is one of the biggest mistakes we could make.
Not that you should be determinist or not,
The biggest mistake in the free will debate
but that there is some relationship
between determinism versus non-determinism,
and free will versus non-free will.
Those are two separate questions.
'Libertarian free will' is truly an ability to make choices
Libertarian free will
and do things in the world that cannot even, in principle,
in any way, be explained
by stuff obeying the laws of physics.
Immanuel Kant and other people put it in these terms:
They said, "There's no way of thinking of a human being
as somehow a collection of physical things
obeying the laws of physics."
There is something that is inescapably human
that cannot be reduced to an understanding
of ourselves as just mindless pieces
conglomerated together to make something with a mind.
Now I would say, no modern scientist believes in that-
to say no is an exaggeration.
There's probably some who do,
but the overwhelming majority of scientists
take seriously the idea that we know what we are physically.
We are collections of atoms, molecules, etc.-
that, in principle, obey the laws of physics.
And where you get into a little bit of tension
with the underlying laws of physics is you say,
"Okay, I'm describing myself.
You know, I have some knowledge,
but I also have some preferences.
I have some desires, I have some values.
I have some feelings, I have some emotions.
And you're telling me that I'm also a collection of neurons.
And then you're telling me that those neurons
are made of atoms and particles
and they obey the laws of physics.
And once I get to the level of neurons,
much less the level of atoms and molecules,
there's no feelings there."
And so this is where we enter
into the idea of 'compatibilist free will.'
Compatibilist free will
Compatibilism says that we can still talk about human beings
as agents making choices, while also agreeing
that we don't violate the laws of physics.
And to say, "Well, how are those two things compatible?"
That's a perfectly fair question,
and the answer is 'emergence.'
The answer is layers of reality.
The answer is there are different ways
of talking about the world
that are compatible with each other,
but very, very different.
When I open the closet door in the morning
and say, "Should I wear the blue shirt or the red shirt?"
It doesn't help me to say,
"Well, I'm gonna do whatever my atoms want me to do."
My atoms have no wants.
There is something that I have that is a want,
and the fact that I'm made of atoms
doesn't make that go away.
The compatibilist position is not
one that denies determinism
or indeterminism-it doesn't care.
What it's saying is
that you can both be a law-abiding thing in the Universe,
a physical system subject to the laws of nature,
and it makes sense to talk about you
as an agent making choices because you're talking
about a different level of description-
a higher-level, emerging kind of phenomenon.
I think that the best objection
to my own view about free will, the compatibilist view,
Objection to compatibilism
the emergent view, is that it's a little loosey-goosey
in some sense, right?
I'm saying I can talk about human beings,
a level of human beings,
or I could talk about atoms and so forth.
Well, where do I draw the line?
The non-compatibilist could say,
"Well, what if someday I'm able
to read your microexpressions on your face
and exactly and reliably predict what you will do next?
Would you still have free will?"
And my answer is: "Maybe not."
My answer is: "I can imagine in principle, getting so good
at predicting how human beings actually behave
on the basis of truly accessible information,
that the concept of free will
no longer becomes helpful or necessary."
That's just an improvement in our scientific understanding.
Do I think that actually will ever happen?
No, for lots of good reasons.
Human beings are incredibly complex.
There's chaotic dynamics, there's quantum fluctuations.
There's a whole bunch of reasons why we should expect
to never give up on the picture of human beings
as agents making decisions.
A lot of people who are anti-free will
the way they phrase it is:
"I will believe that there's free will
The experience of free will
if there's a way that I could have acted differently."
And what they have in mind
is they are collections of particles
or, you know, whatever physical system,
that is obeying the laws of physics-
and, in fact, they could not have acted differently
'cause the laws of physics are the laws of physics.
But the reality is,
given the actual information you know about yourself,
you could have acted differently
because the information you have about yourself
is wildly incomplete.
It's compatible with all sorts
of different microscopic arrangements
of what's going on in your brain and your body.
That incomplete information
is why we're not perfect reasoners about the future.
We have an ability to reason counterfactually:
to think not about just what will happen,
but of various things that could happen,
and then pick the one that we think is a good one.
And since we don't know the positions and velocities
of every molecule in the Universe,
we can't say what would happen
just given the laws of physics.
What we have to say is,
"Given the choices I make,
what is the future that I'm going to help bring about?"
So like it or not, the world that we really know and live in
is one where our choices matter.
That's where meaning comes from,
from recognizing that in the real world
of the knowledge that we have
and our computational boundedness,
we have some responsibility
for bringing about what is going to happen next.
- To learn even more
from the world's biggest thinkers, get Big Think+
for your business.




